Hi

Things are still not back to normal, but getting closer.  I decided it
was time to upgrade Linux so I could run the newer version of m3.
Reinstalled last night, but haven't been able to try the new m3 yet.

Let's see.  Biography.  Here's the one I give to journals:

   Mike received a Bachelor of Science degree in Mathematics from the
   South Dakota School of Mines and Technology. After working for a
   few years as a mining engineer and computer programmer, he obtained
   a Master of Science degree and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the
   University of Arizona. He then joined the Computer Science
   Department at the University of Waterloo, where he taught and did
   research for four years. He has published papers in various
   journals and has written a book on parallel programming.

   Mike joined EDS R&D in 1994. He interests are in distributed
   systems, parallel computation, computer languages, and formal
   methods for software development.

I suppose I should add "numerical methods" :-)

As far as EISPACK, LINPACK, etc. go, I think they are overkill for the
moment.  There are a zillion specialized routines and the coding is
sometimes really weird.  I'd say the best way to incorporate that
stuff in m3 programs is to provide interfaces and link it.

I'd say that to start with we mostly need LU decomposition
(via. Gaussian elimination) and singular value decomposition.  That,
plus a few auxiliary routines to do iterative refinement, back
substitution, and return determinants and inverses, etc., goes a long
ways.  Some basic stuff for sparse systems would be good.  (I haven't
started working on banded matrices yet, but will soon.) 

Re. TeX.  I don't know how much you know about TeX, so I may be
insulting you intelligence here.  An .mf file is a metafont file.
Metafont is a programming language for describing fonts, and running
metafont on a .mf file is one way to get a pk font.  A .tfm file is a
font-metric file that contains info about a font that TeX needs to
typeset---e.g., sizes of letters, etc.  You can have a .tfm file for
fonts that aren't metafont; even for fonts that you don't have at all.
(E.g., built into a printer.)  Pk fonts are not needed to run tex, but
are needed to translate .dvi files into anything else.  TeX
distributions usually take one of two approaches to generating pk
fonts.  There may be a script that runs metafont (the command is often
"mf") to create a bunch of standard pk fonts.  Or, they may provide
some glue that generates pk fonts on demand.  The distribution I use,
"ntex", takes the latter approach and works well.  I've heard that
teTeX also works fine, but I haven't tried it.  

To get back to your question: a) Which distribution of tex are you
trying to install?  b) Is there a script laying around that looks like
it will run mf on a bunch of stuff? c) Have you tried just running
TeX and then dvips or xdvi to see what happens?

-mike




