\input texinfo        @c                    -*- Texinfo -*-
@setfilename dos-host.info
@settitle DOS Host-specific information

@set PROGRESSIVE 94q4

@finalout
@setchapternewpage off
@iftex
@raggedbottom
@global@parindent=0pt
@end iftex

@titlepage
@title Developing With DOS
@subtitle Development with the Cygnus Developer's Kit
@subtitle In a DOS-hosted environment
@subtitle September 1994
@author Cygnus Support

@page

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 Cygnus Support

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
*  DOS-Host: (dos-host.info).          Developing with DOS
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format

Copyright (c) 1994 Cygnus Support

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.

@end ifinfo
@node Top
@top MS-DOS Host Notes for the Cygnus Developer's Kit 

This note is a summary of the Cygnus Developer's Kit features specific
to developing code with @sc{dos}. The @sc{dos} environment has a number of 
idiosyncrasies: we have attempted to share our expertise in development
in this environment. 

If you discover other useful information for inclusion in this note, please
forward it to @code{progressive@@cygnus.com}.

Installation procedures and specific warnings for this release are
covered in the Installation notes.


@include dos-chap.texi

@page
@contents
@c second page break makes sure right-left page alignment works right
@c with a one-page toc, even though we don't have setchapternewpage odd.
@page
@w{ }
@bye
