\input texinfo        @c                    -*- Texinfo -*-
@setfilename targets.info
@settitle Programming Embedded Systems

@finalout
@setchapternewpage odd
@iftex
@raggedbottom
@global@parindent=0pt
@end iftex

@titlepage
@title Programming Embedded Systems
@subtitle With the Cygnus Developer's Kit
@sp 4
@author Cygnus Support
@page

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1993, 1994, 1995 Cygnus Support

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Embedded Systems: (target).          Programming Embedded Systems
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format

Copyright (c) 1993, 1994, 1995 Cygnus Support

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.

@node Top
@top Programming Embedded Systems With the CDK

This document describes programming practices and options for several of
the embedded targets supported by the Cygnus Developer's Kit.  This
document is currently draft status, as the tools themselves are evolving
to meet the needs of our customers.  It is also incomplete, as new
targets are added to our matrix every quarter
(@pxref{Introduction,,Overview,release,Release Notes}).

@menu
* Hitachi SH::
* IDT MIPS::
* LynxOS::
* NLM::
* SPARClite::
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@node Hitachi SH
@chapter Hitachi SH Development

@lowersections
@include hitsh-chap.texi
@raisesections

@node IDT MIPS
@chapter IDT MIPS Development

@lowersections
@include imips-chap.texi
@raisesections

@node LynxOS
@chapter LynxOS Development

@lowersections
@include lynx-chap.texi
@raisesections

@node NLM
@chapter NLM Development

@lowersections
@include pin-chap.texi
@raisesections

@node SPARClite
@chapter Fujitsu SPARClite Development

@lowersections
@include splite-chap.texi
@raisesections

@contents
@bye



