The actual order form follows the descriptions of media contents.

Most of this file is excerpted from the January 1996 GNU's Bulletin.

Please send suggestions for improvements to gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu or the postal
address at the end of the order form.  Thank You.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------


FSF Order Form with Descriptions			January, 1996



Free Software Foundation, Inc.		Telephone: +1-617-542-5942
59 Temple Place - Suite 330		Fax: (including Japan) +1-617-542-2652
Boston, MA   02111-1307	  USA		Electronic mail: `gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu'


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------



There are some sections (e.g. ``Forthcoming GNUs'' and ``How to Get GNU
Software'') which are not in this Order Form file.  If you wish to see them,
ask gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu for the complete June, 1995 GNU's Bulletin.



Table of Contents
-----------------

	Donations Translate Into Free Software
	Cygnus Matches Donations!
	Free Software Redistributors Donate
	Help from Free Software Companies
	Major Changes in GNU Software and Documentation
	The Deluxe Distribution
	GNU Documentation
	GNU Software
	Program/Package Cross Reference
	Tapes
	   Languages Tape
	   Lisps and Emacs Tape
	   Utilities Tape
	   Scheme Tape
	   X11 Tapes
	   Berkeley 4.4BSD-Lite Tape
	   VMS Emacs and VMS Compiler Tapes
	CD-ROMs
	   Pricing of the GNU CD-ROMs
	   December 1995 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
	   December 1994 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
	   December 1993 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
	   Source Code CD-ROMs
	      December 1995 Source Code CD-ROMs
	      June 1995 Source Code CD-ROM
	      May 1994 Source Code CD-ROM
	      November 1993 Source Code CD-ROM
	   MS-DOS Book with CD-ROM
	   Debian GNU/Linux Book with CD-ROM
	MS-DOS Diskettes
	   DJGPP Diskettes
	   Emacs Diskettes
	   Selected Utilities Diskettes
	   Windows Diskette
	Tape & CD-ROM Subscription Service
	FSF T-shirt
	Free Software Foundation Order Form


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------



Donations Translate Into Free Software
**************************************

If you appreciate Emacs, GNU CC, Ghostscript, and other free software, you
may wish to help us make sure there is more in the future--remember,
*donations translate into more free software!*

Your donation to us is tax-deductible in the United States.  We gladly accept
*any* currency, although the U.S. dollar is the most convenient.

If your employer has a matching gifts program for charitable donations,
please arrange to: add the FSF to the list of organizations for your
employer's matching gifts program; and have your donation matched (note *Note
Cygnus Matches Donations!::).  If you do not know, please ask your personnel
department.

Circle amount you are donating, cut out this form, and send it with your
donation to:

	Free Software Foundation, Inc.
	59 Temple Place - Suite 330
	Boston, MA  02111-1307
	USA


	$500	 $250	  $100	   $50	   Other $________

	Other currency:________


You can charge a donation to any of Carte Blanche, Diner's Club, JCB,
MasterCard, Visa, or American Express.	Charges may also be faxed to
+1-617-542-2652.

	Card type: __________________  Expiration Date: _____________

	Account Number: _____________________________________________

	Cardholder's Signature: _____________________________________

	Name: _______________________________________________________

	Street Address: _____________________________________________

	City/State/Province: ________________________________________

	Zip Code/Postal Code/Country: _______________________________



Cygnus Matches Donations!
*************************

To encourage cash donations to the Free Software Foundation, Cygnus Support
will continue to contribute corporate funds to the FSF to accompany gifts by
its employees, and by its customers and their employees.

Donations payable to the Free Software Foundation should be sent by eligible
persons to Cygnus Support, which will add its gifts and forward the total to
the FSF each quarter.  The FSF will provide the contributor with a receipt to
recognize the contribution (which is tax-deductible on U.S.  tax returns).
For more information, please contact Cygnus:

	Cygnus Support
	1937 Landings Drive
	Mountain View, CA   94043
	USA

	Telephone: 415-903-1400
		   +1-800-Cygnus1 (-294-6871)
	Fax:	   415-903-0122
	Electronic-Mail: `info@cygnus.com'
	FTP: `ftp.cygnus.com'
	WWW: `http://www.cygnus.com/'



Free Software Redistributors Donate
***********************************

The SNOW 2.1 CD producers added the words "Includes $5 donation to the FSF"
to the front of their CD.  Potential buyers will know just how much of the
price is for the FSF & how much is for the redistributor.

The Sun Users Group Deutschland & ASCII Corporation (Japan) have added
donations to the FSF to the price of their next GNU software CD-ROMs.

Austin Code Works, a free software redistributor, supports free software
development by giving the FSF 20% of the selling price for the GNU software
CDs they produce & sell.

Walnut Creek CDROM & Info Magic, free software redistributors, are also
giving us part of their selling price.

TOHDO-SHA is donating 400 yen to the FSF for each copy of `The GNU Emacs Lisp
Reference Manual, Japanese Edition' sold at bookstores in Japan.

CQ Publishing made a large donation from the sales of their GAWK book in
Japanese.

In the long run, the success of free software depends on how much new free
software people develop.  Free software distribution offers an opportunity to
raise funds for such development in an ethical way.  These redistributors
have made use of the opportunity.  Many others let it go to waste.

You can help promote free software development by convincing for-a-fee
redistributors to contribute--either by doing development themselves or by
donating to development organizations (the FSF and others).

The way to convince distributors to contribute is to demand and expect this
of them.  This means choosing among distributors partly by how much they give
to free software development.  Then you can show distributors they must
compete to be the one who gives the most.

To make this work, you must insist on numbers that you can compare, such as,
"We will give ten dollars to the Foobar project for each disk sold." A vague
commitment, such as "A portion of the profits is donated," doesn't give you a
basis for comparison.  Even a precise fraction "of the profits from this
disk" is not very meaningful, since creative accounting and unrelated
business decisions can greatly alter what fraction of the sales price counts
as profit.

Also, press developers for firm information about what kind of development
they do or support.  Some kinds make much more long-term difference than
others.	 For example, maintaining a separate version of a GNU program
contributes very little; maintaining a program on behalf of the GNU Project
contributes much.  Easy new ports contribute little, since someone else would
surely do them; difficult ports such as adding a new CPU to the GNU compiler
or Mach contribute more; major new features and programs contribute the most.

By establishing the idea that supporting further development is "the proper
thing to do" when distributing free software for a fee, we can assure a
steady flow of resources for making more free software.



Help from Free Software Companies
*********************************

When choosing a free software business, ask those you are considering how
much they do to assist free software development, e.g., by contributing money
to free software development or by writing free software improvements
themselves for general use.  By basing your decision partially on this
factor, you can help encourage those who profit from free software to
contribute to its growth.

Wingnut (SRA's special GNU support group) regularly donates a part of its
income to the FSF to support the development of new GNU programs.  Listing
them here is our way of thanking them.	Wingnut has made a pledge to donate
10% of their income to the FSF, and has purchased several Deluxe Distribution
packages in Japan.  Also see *Note Cygnus Matches Donations!::.

	Wingnut Project
	Software Research Associates, Inc.
	1-1-1 Hirakawa-cho, Chiyoda-ku
	Tokyo 102, Japan

	Phone:	(+81-3)3234-2611
	Fax:	(+81-3)3942-5174
	E-mail: `info-wingnut@sra.co.jp'
	WWW: `http://www.sra.co.jp/public/sra/product/wingnut/'



Major Changes in GNU Software and Documentation
***********************************************

   * A New FSF T-shirt!	  (*Note FSF T-shirt::)

     We have a new T-shirt.  This design was inspired by the cover of the
     `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual'.

   * GNU Emacs 19.30   (*Note GNU Software::)

     We have just released Emacs 19.30.	 New features include support for menu
     bars on text-only terminals, a total rewrite of GNUS, multiple frames on
     Windows NT and Windows 95, & many others.

   * New Programs on the Tapes	 (*Note GNU Software::)

     `gettext' is now on the *Note Languages Tape::.  Termutils & Midnight
     Commander have been added to the *Note Utilities Tape::.  CLX has been
     added to the *Note Lisps/Emacs Tape::.  Newer versions of many of our
     programs & manuals have been placed on all the media we distribute.

   * New Source Code CD!

     We have just released the December 1995 Source Code CD-ROMs (Edition 7).
     Due to increasing amounts of GNU Software, the Source Code CD is now a
     two disc set--the price remains unchanged!	 The new programs included
     are: apache, CLX, Elisp archive, `ffcall', `gettext', GN, Gnans,
     `gnuserv', Hyperbole, Midnight Commander, Oaklisp, SIPP, SNePS, Spinner,
     W3, and `xgrabsc'.	 *Note GNU Software::, for more information about
     these packages.  Also on the CD-ROMs are full distributions of MIT X11R6
     (both our Required & Optional distributions), MIT Scheme 7.3, Emacs
     19.30, GCC 2.7.1, and current versions of all other GNU Software.	For
     more information, see *Note December 1995 Source Code CD-ROMs::.

   * New Compiler Tools CD-ROM

     We have a new edition of the Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM with updated
     versions of much of its software.	It contains executables of the GNU
     compiler tools for some systems that don't normally come with a
     compiler.	This allows users of those systems to compile their own
     software without having to buy a proprietary compiler.

     We hope to include more systems with each update of this CD-ROM.  If you
     can help build binaries for new systems or have one to suggest, please
     contact us at either address on page 1.  For more information, see *Note
     Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::.

   * New/Updated Manuals since Last Bulletin   (*Note Documentation::)

     We have a new manual: `The GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual, Japanese
     Edition' - the FSF would like to thank the team of over 30 Japanese who
     did the translation.  These new editions include bug fixes and
     additional information: `The GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual', `GNU
     Make', `Bison', `Programming in Emacs Lisp: An Introduction', and `The
     Termcap Manual'.

   * Older FSF CD-ROMs Available at a Reduced Price

     While supplies last, older versions of our CD-ROMs are available at a
     reduced price.  Note that the newest version has bug fixes and
     improvements that the older versions do not.  See the *note Free
     Software Foundation Order Form::..

   * GNU Software Works on MS-DOS   (Also *note GNU Software::.)

     GNU Emacs 19 and many other GNU programs have been ported to MS-DOS for
     i386/i486/Pentium machines.  We ship binaries & sources on the *Note
     DJGPP Diskettes::; *Note Emacs Diskettes::; *Note Selected Utilities
     Diskettes::; & the *Note Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::.	 We will ship
     binaries & sources on the *Note MS-DOS Book with CD-ROM::, when it is
     available.

   * The FSF Takes Credit Cards

     We take these credit cards: Carte Blanche, Diner's Club, MasterCard, JCB,
     Visa, and American Express.  Please note that we are charged about 5% of
     an order's total amount in credit card processing fees.  Please consider
     paying by check instead or adding on a 5% donation to make up the
     difference.



The Deluxe Distribution
***********************

The Free Software Foundation has been asked repeatedly to create a package
that provides executables for all of our software.  Normally we offer only
sources.  In addition to providing binaries with the source code, the Deluxe
Distribution includes a complete set of our printed manuals and reference
cards.

The FSF Deluxe Distribution contains the binaries and sources to hundreds of
different programs including GNU Emacs, the GNU C Compiler, the GNU Debugger,
the complete X Window System, and all the GNU utilities.

We will make a Deluxe Distribution for most machines/operating systems.	 We
may be able to send someone to your office to do the compilation, if we can't
find a suitable machine close to us.  However, we can only compile the
programs that already support your chosen machine/system - porting is a
separate matter (to commission a port, consult the GNU Service Directory;
details in *Note Free Software Support::).  Compiling all these programs
takes time; a Deluxe Distribution for an unusual machine will take longer to
produce than one for a common machine.	Please contact the FSF Office with
any questions.

We supply the software in one of these tape formats in Unix `tar' format:
1600 or 6250bpi 1/2in reel, Sun DC300XLP 1/4in cartridge - QIC24, IBM RS/6000
1/4in c.t. - QIC 150, Exabyte 8mm c.t., or DAT 4mm c.t.	 If your computer
cannot read any of these, please contact us to see if we can handle your
format.

The manuals included are one each of the `Bison', `Calc', `GAWK', `GNU C
Compiler', `GNU C Library', `GDB', `Flex', `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference',
`Programming in Emacs Lisp: An Introduction', `Make', `Texinfo', & `Termcap'
manuals; six copies of the `GNU Emacs' manual; and a packet of ten reference
cards each for Emacs, Bison, Calc, Flex, & GDB.

Every Deluxe Distribution also has a copy of the latest editions of our
CD-ROMs that have sources of our software & compiler tool binaries for some
systems.  The MS-DOS CD is in ISO 9660 format.	The other CDs are in ISO 9660
format with Rock Ridge extensions.

The price of the Deluxe Distribution is $5000 (shipping included).  These
sales provide enormous financial assistance to help the FSF develop more free
software.  To order, please fill out the "Deluxe Distribution" section on the
*note Free Software Foundation Order Form::.  and send it to:

	Free Software Foundation, Inc.
	59 Temple Place - Suite 330
	Boston, MA   02111-1307
	USA

	Telephone: +1-617-542-5942
	Fax (including Japan): +1-617-542-2652
	Electronic mail: gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu



GNU Documentation
*****************

GNU is dedicated to having quality, easy-to-use online & printed
documentation.	GNU manuals are intended to explain underlying concepts,
describe how to use all the features of each program, & give examples of
command use.  GNU manuals are distributed as Texinfo source files, which
yield both typeset hardcopy via the TeX document formatting system and online
hypertext display via the menu-driven Info system.  Source for these manuals
comes with our software; here are the manuals that we publish as printed
books.	See the *note Free Software Foundation Order Form::., to order them.

Most GNU manuals are bound as soft cover books with "lay-flat" bindings.
This allows you to open them so they lie flat on a table without creasing the
binding.  They have an inner cloth spine and an outer cardboard cover that
will not break or crease as an ordinary paperback will.	 Currently, the
`GDB', `Emacs', `Emacs Lisp Reference', `Programming in Emacs Lisp: An
Introduction', `GAWK', `Make', `Bison', & `Texinfo' manuals have this
binding.  The other GNU manuals also lie flat when opened, using a GBC or
Wire-O binding.	 All our manuals are 7in by 9.25in except the 8.5in by 11in
`Calc' manual.

The edition number of the manual and version number of the program listed
after each manual's name were current at the time this Bulletin was published.

`Debugging with GDB' (Edition 4.12 for Version 4.14) tells how to run your
program under GNU Debugger control, examine and alter data, modify a
program's flow of control, and use GDB through GNU Emacs.

The `GNU Emacs Manual' (11th Edition for Version 19.29) describes editing with
GNU Emacs.  It explains advanced features, including outline mode and regular
expression search; how to use special programming modes to write languages
like C++ and TeX; how to use the `tags' utility; how to compile and correct
code; how to make your own keybindings; and other elementary customizations.

`Programming in Emacs Lisp: An Introduction' (Edition 1.04) is for people who
are not necessarily interested in programming, but who do want to customize
or extend their computing environment.	If you read it in Emacs under Info
mode, you can run the sample programs directly.

`The GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual' (Edition 2.4 for Version 19.29) and
`The GNU Emacs Lisp Reference, Japanese Edition' (Japanese DRAFT Revision
1.0, from English Edition 2.4 for Version 19.29) covers this programming
language in depth, including data types, control structures, functions,
macros, syntax tables, searching/matching, modes, windows, keymaps, byte
compilation, and the operating system interface.

`The GAWK Manual' (Edition 0.16 for Version 2.16) tells how to use the GNU
implementation of `awk'.  It is written for those who have never used `awk'
and describes the features of this powerful string and record manipulation
language.

The `Make Manual' (Edition 0.49 for Version 3.74) describes GNU `make', a
program used to rebuild parts of other programs.  The manual tells how to
write "makefiles", which specify how a program is to be compiled and how its
files depend on each other.  Included are an introductory chapter for novice
users and a section about automatically generated dependencies.

The `Flex' manual (Edition 1.03 for Version 2.3.7) teaches you to write a
lexical scanner definition for the `flex' program to create a C++ or C-coded
scanner that recognizes the patterns defined.  You need no prior knowledge of
scanners.

The `Bison' manual (December 1993 Edition for Version 1.23) teaches you how
to write context-free grammars for the Bison program that convert into
C-coded parsers.  You need no prior knowledge of parser generators.

`Using and Porting GNU CC' (September 1994 Edition for Version 2.6) tells how
to run, install, and port the GNU C Compiler to new systems.  It lists new
features and incompatibilities of GCC, but people not familiar with C will
still need a good reference on the C programming language.  It also covers
G++.  We are doing limited copier runs of this manual until it becomes more
stable.

The `Texinfo' manual (Edition 2.21 for Version 3) explains the markup
language that produces our online Info documentation & typeset hardcopies.
It tells you how to make tables, lists, chapters, nodes, indexes, cross
references, & how to catch mistakes.  This second edition describes over 50
new commands.

`The Termcap Manual' (2nd Edition for Version 1.2), often described as "twice
as much as you ever wanted to know about termcap," details the format of the
termcap database, the definitions of terminal capabilities, and the process
of interrogating a terminal description.  This manual is primarily for
programmers.

The `C Library Reference Manual' (Edition 0.06 for Version 1.09) describes
the library's facilities, including both what Unix calls "library functions"
& "system calls."  We are doing small copier runs of this manual until it
becomes more stable.  Please send fixes to `bug-glibc-manual@prep.ai.mit.edu'.

The `Emacs Calc Manual' (Edition 2.02 for Version 2.02) is both a tutorial
and a reference manual.	 It tells how to do ordinary arithmetic, how to use
Calc for algebra, calculus, and other forms of mathematics, and how to extend
Calc.



GNU Software
************

All our software is available via FTP; see *Note How to Get GNU Software::.
We also offer software on various media and printed documentation:

   * *Note CD-ROMs::.

   * *Note Tapes::.

   * *Note MS-DOS Diskettes::.

   * *Note Documentation::, which includes manuals and reference cards.

In these articles describing the contents of each medium, the version number
listed after each program name was current when we published this Bulletin.
When you order a distribution tape, diskette, or newer CD-ROM, some of the
programs may be newer and therefore the version number higher.	See the *note
Free Software Foundation Order Form::., for ordering information.

Some of the contents of our tape and FTP distributions are compressed.	We
have software on our tapes and FTP sites to uncompress these files.  Due to
patent troubles with `compress', we use another compression program, `gzip'.
(Such prohibitions on software development are fought by the League for
Programming Freedom; *note What Is the LPF::., for details.)

GNU `make' is on several of our tapes because some system vendors supply no
`make' utility at all and some native `make' programs lack the `VPATH'
feature essential for using the GNU configure system to its full extent.  The
GNU `make' sources have a shell script to build `make' itself on such systems.

We welcome all bug reports and enhancements sent to the appropriate
electronic mailing list (*note Free Software Support::.).



Configuring GNU Software
------------------------

We are using, Autoconf, a uniform scheme for configuring GNU software
packages in order to compile them (see "Autoconf" below, in this article).
The goal is to have all GNU software support the same alternatives for naming
machine and system types.

Ultimately, it will be possible to configure and build the entire system all
at once, eliminating the need to configure each individual package separately.

You can also specify both the host and target system to build
cross-compilation tools.  Most GNU programs now use Autoconf-generated
configure scripts.



GNU Software currently available
--------------------------------

For future programs and features, see *Note Forthcoming GNUs::.

Key to cross reference:


    BinCD
	  December 1994 Binaries CD-ROM

    DjgpD
	  Djgpp Diskettes

    DosBC
	  MS-DOS Book with CD-ROM

    EmcsD
	  Emacs Diskettes

    LangT
	  Languages Tape

    LiteT
	  4.4BSD-Lite Tape

    LspEmcT
	  Lisps/Emacs Tape

    SchmT
	  Scheme Tape

    SrcCD
	  December 1995 Source CD-ROMs

    UtilD
	  Selected Utilities Diskettes

    UtilT
	  Utilities Tape

    VMSCmpT
	  VMS Compiler Tape

    VMSEmcsT
	  VMS Emacs Tape

    WdwsD
	  Windows Diskette

    X11OptT
	  X11 Optional Tape

    X11ReqT
	  X11 Required Tape

[FSFman] shows that we sell a manual for that package.	[FSFrc] shows we sell
a reference card for that package.  To order them, see the *note Free
Software Foundation Order Form::..  *Note Documentation::, for more
information on the manuals.  Source code for each manual or reference card is
included with each package.

   * `acm'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `acm' is a LAN-oriented, multiplayer aerial combat simulation that runs
     under the X Window System.	 Players engage in air to air combat against
     one another using heat seeking missiles and cannons.  We are working on
     a more accurate simulation of real airplane flight characteristics.

   * apache   (SrcCD)

     Apache is an HTTP server designed as a plug-in replacement for version
     1.3 or 1.4 of the NCSA server.  It fixes numerous bugs in the NCSA
     server and includes many frequently requested new features, and has an
     API which allows it to be extended to meet users' needs more easily.

   * Autoconf	(SrcCD, UtilT)

     Autoconf produces shell scripts which automatically configure source code
     packages.	These scripts adapt the packages to many kinds of Unix-like
     systems without manual user intervention.	Autoconf creates a script for
     a package from a template file which lists the operating system features
     which the package can use, in the form of `m4' macro calls.  Autoconf
     requires GNU `m4' to operate, but the resulting configure scripts it
     generates do not.

   * BASH   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNU's shell, BASH (Bourne Again SHell), is compatible with the Unix `sh'
     and offers many extensions found in `csh' and `ksh'.  BASH has job
     control, `csh'-style command history, command-line editing (with Emacs
     and `vi' modes built-in, and the ability to rebind keys) via the
     `readline' library.  BASH conforms to the POSIX 1003.2-1992 standard.

   * `bc'   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     `bc' is an interactive algebraic language with arbitrary precision
     numbers.  GNU `bc' follows the POSIX 1003.2-1992 standard, with several
     extensions including multi-character variable names, an `else'
     statement, and full Boolean expressions.  The RPN calculator `dc' is now
     distributed as part of the same package, but GNU `bc' is not implemented
     as a `dc' preprocessor.

   * BFD   (BinCD, DjgpD, DosBC, LangT, SrcCD)

     The Binary File Descriptor library allows a program which operates on
     object files (e.g., `ld' or GDB) to support many different formats in a
     clean way.	 BFD provides a portable interface, so that only BFD needs to
     know the details of a particular format.  One result is that all
     programs using BFD will support formats such as a.out, COFF, and ELF.
     BFD comes with Texinfo source for a manual (not yet published on paper).

     At present, BFD is not distributed separately; it is included with
     packages that use it.

   * Binutils	(BinCD, DjgpD, DosBC, LangT, SrcCD; `gas' only on VMSCmpT)

     Binutils includes these programs: `ar', `c++filt', `demangle', `gas',
     `gprof', `ld', `nlmconv', `nm', `objcopy', `objdump', `ranlib', `size',
     `strings', & `strip'.

     Binutils version 2 uses the BFD library.  The GNU assembler, `gas',
     supports the a29k, Alpha, H8/300, H8/500, HP-PA, i386, i960, m68k, m88k,
     MIPS, NS32K, SH, SPARC, Tahoe, Vax and Z8000 CPUs, and attempts to be
     compatible with many other assemblers for UNIX and embedded systems.  It
     can produce mixed C-and-assembly listings, and includes a macro facility
     similar to that in some other assemblers.	GNU's linker `ld' emits
     source-line numbered error messages for multiply-defined symbols and
     undefined references, and interprets a superset of AT&T's Linker Command
     Language, which gives control over where segments are placed in memory.
     `nlmconv' converts object files into Novell NetWare Loadable Modules.
     `objdump' can disassemble code for most of the CPUs listed above, and
     can display other data (e.g., symbols and relocations) from any file
     format read by BFD.

   * Bison   (BinCD,DjgpD,DosBC,LangT,SrcCD,VMSCmpT)[FSFman,FSFrc]

     Bison is an upwardly compatible replacement for the parser generator
     `yacc'.  Texinfo source for the `Bison Manual' and reference card are
     included.	*Note Documentation::.

     A recent policy change allows non-free programs to use Bison-generated
     parsers.  *Note Conditions for Using Bison::.

   * C Library	 (BinCD, LangT, SrcCD) [FSFman]

     The GNU C library supports ANSI C-1989, POSIX 1003.1-1990 and most of the
     functions in POSIX 1003.2-1992.  It is upwardly compatible with 4.4BSD
     and includes many System V functions, plus GNU extensions.

     The C Library performs many functions of the Unix system calls in the
     GNU/Hurd.	Mike Haertel has written a fast `malloc' which wastes less
     memory than the old GNU version.  The GNU regular-expression functions
     (`regex' and `rx') now nearly conform to the POSIX 1003.2 standard.

     GNU `stdio' lets you define new kinds of streams, just by writing a few
     C functions.  The `fmemopen' function uses this to open a stream on a
     string, which can grow as necessary.  You can define your own `printf'
     formats to use a C function you have written.  For example, you can
     safely use format strings from user input to implement a `printf'-like
     function for another programming language.	 Extended `getopt' functions
     are already used to parse options, including long options, in many GNU
     utilities.

     The C Library runs on Sun-3 (SunOS 4.1), Sun-4 (SunOS 4.1 or Solaris 2),
     HP 9000/300 (4.3BSD), SONY News 800 (NewsOS 3 or 4), MIPS DECstation
     (Ultrix 4), DEC Alpha (OSF/1), i386/i486/Pentium (System V, SVR4, BSD,
     SCO 3.2, & SCO ODT 2.0), Sequent Symmetry i386 (Dynix 3), & SGI (Irix
     4).  *Note Forthcoming GNUs::.  Texinfo source for the
     `GNU C Library Reference Manual' is included (*note Documentation::..

   * C++ Library   (BinCD, DjgpD, DosBC, LangT, SrcCD)

     The GNU C++ library (libg++) contains an extensive collection of C++
     "forest" classes, an IOStream library for input/output routines, and
     support tools for use with G++.  Supported classes include: Obstacks,
     multiple-precision Integers and Rationals, Complex numbers, arbitrary
     length Strings, BitSets, and BitStrings.

     The distribution also includes the libstdc++ library.  This implements
     library facilities defined by the forthcoming ANSI/ISO C++ standard,
     including a port of the Standard Template Library.

   * Calc   (DosBC, LspEmcT, SrcCD) [FSFman, FSFrc]

     Calc (written by Dave Gillespie in Emacs Lisp) is an extensible, advanced
     desk calculator & mathematical tool that runs as part of GNU Emacs.  You
     can use Calc just as a simple four-function calculator, but it has many
     more features including: choice of algebraic or RPN (stack-based) entry;
     logarithmic, trigonometric, & financial functions; arbitrary precision;
     complex numbers; vectors; matrices; dates; times; infinities; sets;
     algebraic simplification; differentiation & integration.  It outputs to
     `gnuplot', & comes with source for a manual & reference card (*note
     Documentation::.).

   * `cfengine'	  (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `cfengine' is used for maintaining site-wide configuration of a
     heterogeneous Unix network using a simple high level language.  Its
     appearance is similar to `rdist', but also allows many more operations
     to be performed automatically.  See Mark Burgess, "A Site Configuration
     Engine", `Computing Systems', Vol. 8, No. 3 (ask `office@usenix.org' how
     to get a copy).

   * Chess   (SrcCD, UtilT, WdwsD)

     GNU Chess enables most modern computers to play a full game of chess.  It
     supports a plain terminal interface, a curses interface, and a spiffy X
     Window interface via `xboard'.

     Improvements this past year include fixes to the game analyzer, book, &
     hash table; smartening up draw and mate; improved thinking on opponent's
     time; Autoconf installation; a makefile for Windows NT compilation;
     forward pruning; unlimited quiescence captures; improved evaluation;
     improved null & time control logic; & repetition-detection.

     GNU Chess was originated by Stuart Cracraft.  Improvements & rewrites are
     from John Stanback, Cha Kong Sian, Mike McGann, and many others.

     Send bugs to `bug-gnu-chess@prep.ai.mit.edu' & general comments to
     `info-gnu-chess@prep.ai.mit.edu'.

   * CLISP   (LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     CLISP is a Common Lisp implementation by Bruno Haible and Michael Stoll.
     It mostly supports the Lisp described by `Common LISP: The Language (2nd
     edition)' and the ANSI Common Lisp standard.  CLISP includes an
     interpreter, a byte-compiler, a large subset of CLOS, a foreign language
     interface, and, for some machines, a screen editor.  The user interface
     language (English, German, French) is choosable at run time.  Major
     packages that run in CLISP include CLX & Garnet.  CLISP needs only 2 MB
     of memory & runs on many microcomputers (including MS-DOS systems, OS/2,
     Windows NT, Amiga 500-4000, Acorn RISC PC) & Unix-like systems
     (GNU/Linux, Sun4, SVR4, SGI, HP-UX, DEC Alpha, NeXTStep, & others).

   * Common Lisp   **Note Forthcoming GNUs::*	(LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     GNU Common Lisp (GCL, formerly known as Kyoto Common Lisp) is a compiler
     & interpreter for Common Lisp.  GCL is very portable & extremely
     efficient on a wide class of applications, & compares favorably in
     performance with commercial Lisps on several large theorem-prover &
     symbolic algebra systems.	GCL supports the CLtL1 specification but is
     moving towards the proposed ANSI standard.

     GCL compiles to C & then uses the native optimizing C compiler (e.g.,
     GCC).  A function with a fixed number of args & one value turns into a C
     function of the same number of args, returning one value--so GCL is
     maximally efficient on such calls.	 Its conservative garbage collector
     gives great freedom to the C compiler to put Lisp values in registers.
     It has a source level Lisp debugger for interpreted code & displays
     source code in an Emacs window.  Its profiler (based on the C profiling
     tools) counts function calls & the time spent in each function.

     There is now a built-in interface to the Tk widget system.	 It runs in a
     separate process, so users may monitor progress on Lisp computations or
     interact with running computations via a windowing interface.

     There is also an Xlib interface via C (xgcl-2).   CLX runs with GCL, as
     does PCL (see "PCL" later in this article).  *Note Forthcoming GNUs::,
     for plans regarding GCL or for recent developments.

     GCL version 2.2 is released under the GNU Library General Public License.

   * CLX   (LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     CLX is an X Window interface library for GCL.

   * `cpio'   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilD, UtilT)

     `cpio' is an archive program with all the features of SVR4 `cpio',
     including support for the final POSIX 1003.1 `ustar' standard.  `mt', a
     program to position magnetic tapes, is included with `cpio'.

   * CVS   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     CVS, the Concurrent Version System, manages software revision & release
     control at a multi-developer, multi-directory, multi-group site.  It
     works best with RCS versions 4 and above, but will parse older RCS
     formats, losing some of CVS's fancier features.  (See Berliner, Brian,
     "CVS-II: Parallelizing Software Development," `Proceedings of the Winter
     1990 USENIX Association Conference'; ask `office@usenix.org' how to get
     a copy.)

   * DejaGnu   (LangT, SrcCD)

     DejaGnu is a framework to test programs with a single front end for all
     tests.  The framework's flexibility & consistency makes it easy to write
     tests.

     DejaGnu comes with `expect', which runs scripts to conduct dialogs with
     programs.

   * Diffutils	 (DjgpD, DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNU `diff' compares files showing line-by-line changes in several
     flexible formats.	It is much faster than traditional Unix versions.  The
     Diffutils package contains `diff', `diff3', `sdiff', & `cmp'.  Recent
     improvements include more consistent handling of character sets and a
     new `diff' option to do all input/output in binary; this is useful on
     some non-POSIX hosts.  Plans for the Diffutils package include support
     for internationalization (e.g., error messages in Chinese) and for some
     non-Unix PC environments.

   * DJGPP   (BinCD, DjgpD, DosBC)

     DJ Delorie has ported GCC/G++ (see "GCC" in this article) to i386s
     running MS-DOS.  DJGPP has a 32-bit i386 DOS extender with a symbolic
     debugger; development libraries; & ports of Bison, `flex', & Binutils.
     Full source code is provided.  It needs at least 5MB of hard disk space
     to install & 512K of RAM to use.  It supports SVGA (up to 1024x768), XMS
     & VDISK memory allocation, `himem.sys', VCPI (e.g., QEMM, DESQview, &
     386MAX), & DPMI (e.g., Windows 3.x, OS/2, QEMM, & QDPMI).

     The FSF offers it on the *Note Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::, and on
     the *Note DJGPP Diskettes::.  FTP from `oak.oakland.edu' in
     `/simtel/vendors/djgpp/' (or another SimTel mirror site).

     To join a DJGPP users mailing list, ask
     `djgpp-request@sun.soe.clarkson.edu'.

   * `dld'   (LangT, SrcCD)

     `dld' is a dynamic linker written by W. Wilson Ho.	 Linking your program
     with the `dld' library allows you to dynamically load object files into
     the running binary.  Currently supported are VAX (Ultrix), Sun 3 (SunOS
     3.4 & 4.0), SPARC (SunOS 4.0), Sequent Symmetry (Dynix), & Atari ST.

   * `doschk'	(DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     This program is a utility to help software developers ensure that their
     source file names are distinguishable on System V platforms with
     14-character filenames and on MS-DOS systems with 8+3 character
     filenames.

   * `ecc'   (LangT, SrcCD)

     `ecc' is a Reed-Solomon error correction checking program, which can
     correct three byte errors in a block of 255 bytes and detect more severe
     errors.  Contact `paulf@stanford.edu' for more information.

   * `ed'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `ed' is the standard text editor.	It is line-oriented and can be used
     interactively or in scripts.

   * Elib   (DosBC, LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     Elib is a small library of Emacs Lisp functions, including routines for
     using AVL trees and doubly-linked lists.

   * Elisp archive   (SrcCD)

     This is a snapshot of Ohio State's GNU Emacs Lisp FTP Archive.  FTP it
     from `archive.cis.ohio-state.edu' in `/pub/gnu/emacs/elisp-archive'.

   * Emacs   **Note Forthcoming GNUs:: for future plans.*

     In 1975, Richard Stallman developed the first Emacs, an extensible,
     customizable real-time display editor & computing environment.  GNU Emacs
     is his second implementation.  It offers true Lisp--smoothly integrated
     into the editor--for writing extensions & provides an interface to the X
     Window System.  It runs on Unix, MS-DOS, & Windows NT.  In addition to
     its powerful native command set, Emacs has extensions which emulate the
     editors vi & EDT (Digital's VMS editor).  Emacs has many other features
     which make it a full computing support environment.  Source for the `GNU
     Emacs Manual' & a reference card comes with the software.	Sources for
     the `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual' & `Programming in Emacs Lisp: An
     Introduction' are distributed in separate packages.  *Note
     Documentation::.

   * Emacs 18	(LspEmcT, SrcCD, VMSEmcsT) [FSFrc]

     Emacs 18.59 is the last release of version 18 from the FSF.  We no longer
     maintain it.  It supports these Unix systems that Emacs 19 doesn't
     support (please help port Emacs 19 to these systems): Alliant FX/80,
     Altos 3068, Amdahl (UTS), AT&T (3Bs & 7300 PC), CCI 5/32 & 6/32,
     Celerity, Digital (VAX VMS), Dual, Encore (APC, DPC, & XPC), HLH Orion
     (original & 1/05), ISI (Optimum V, 80386), Masscomp, NCR Tower 32 (SVR2
     & SVR3), Nixdorf Targon 31, Nu (TI & LMI), pfa50, Plexus, Prime EXL,
     Stride (system rel. 2), Tahoe, Tandem Integrity S2, Tektronix 16000,
     Triton 88, Ustation E30 (SS5E), Whitechapel (MG1), & Wicat.

   * Emacs 19	(DosBC, EmcsD, LspEmcT, SrcCD) [FSFman(s), FSFrc]

     Emacs 19 works with character-only terminals & with the X Window System
     (with or without an X toolkit).  New features in Emacs 19 include:
     multiple X windows ("frames" to Emacs), with a separate X window for the
     minibuffer or a minibuffer attached to each X window; property lists
     associated with regions of text in a buffer; multiple fonts & colors
     defined by those properties; simplified/improved processing of function
     keys, mouse clicks, and mouse movement; X selection processing,
     including clipboard selections; hooks to be run if the point or mouse
     moves outside a certain range; menu bars and popup menus defined by
     keymaps; scrollbars; before- and after-change hooks; a source-level
     debugger for Emacs Lisp programs; floating point numbers; improved
     buffer allocation, including returning storage to the system when a
     buffer is killed; interfacing with the X resource manager; many updated
     libraries; integrated support for version control systems (RCS, CVS, &
     SCCS); Autoconf based configuration; and support for European character
     sets.

     Recent features include the ability to open frames on more than one X
     display from a single Emacs job, operation on MS-DOS, MS Windows, and
     Windows NT, displaying multiple views of an outline at the same time,
     support for the Athena & Motif widgets, version control support for CVS
     and for multiple branches, text properties for formatting text, commands
     to edit text properties and save them in files, and GNU-standard
     long-named command line options.

     Emacs 19.30 works on: Acorn RISC (RISCiX); Alliant FX/2800 (BSD); Alpha
     (OSF/1); Apollo (DomainOS); Bull DPX/2 2nn & 3nn (SysV.3) & sps7
     (SysV.2); Clipper; Convex (BSD); Cubix QBx (SysV); Data General Aviion
     (DGUX); DEC MIPS (Ultrix 4.2, OSF/1, not VMS); Elxsi 6400 (SysV); Gould
     Power Node & NP1 (4.2 & 4.3BSD); Harris Night Hawk 1200, 3000, 4000 &
     5000 (cxux); Honeywell XPS100 (SysV); HP 9000 series 200, 300, 700, 800
     (but not 500) (4.3BSD; HP-UX 7, 8, 9); Intel i386/i486/Pentium
     (GNU/Linux, 386BSD, AIX, BSDI/386, FreeBSD, Esix, ISC, MS-DOS (*note
     MS-DOS Diskettes::., & *Note MS-DOS Book with CD-ROM::), NetBSD,
     SCO3.2v4, Solaris, SysV, Xenix, WindowsNT); IBM RS/6000 (AIX 3.2) &
     RT/PC (AIX, BSD); Motorola Delta 147 & 187 (SysV.3, SysV.4, m88kbcs);
     National Semiconductor 32K (Genix); NeXT (BSD, Mach 2 w/ NeXTStep 3.0);
     Paragon (OSF/1); Prime EXL (SysV); Pyramid (BSD); Sequent Symmetry (BSD,
     ptx); Siemens RM400 & RM600 (SysV); SGI Iris 4D (Irix 4.x & 5.x); Sony
     News/RISC (NewsOS); Stardent i860 (SysV); Sun 3 & 4, SPARC 1, 1+, 2, 10,
     Classic (SunOS 4.0, 4.1, Solaris 2.0-2.3); Tadpole 68k (SysV); Tektronix
     XD88 (SysV.3) & 4300 (BSD); & Titan P2 & P3 (SysV).

     Other configurations supported by Emacs 18 should work with few changes
     in Emacs 19; as users tell us more about their experiences with different
     systems, we will augment the list.	 Also see *Note Forthcoming GNUs::.

   * `es'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `es' is an extensible shell (based on `rc') with first class functions,
     lexical scope, exceptions and rich return values (i.e., functions can
     return values other than just numbers).  `es''s extensibility comes from
     the ability to modify and extend the shell's built-in services, such as
     path searching and redirection.  Like `rc', it is great for both
     interactive use and scripting, particularly since its quoting rules are
     much less baroque than the C and Bourne shells.

   * `f2c'   (LangT, SrcCD)

     `f2c' converts Fortran-77 source into C or C++, which can be compiled
     with GCC or G++.  Get bug fixes by FTP from site `netlib.att.com' or by
     email from `netlib@research.att.com'.  See the file
     `/netlib/f2c/readme.Z' for a summary.  Also see the GNU Fortran item
     later in this article, and in *Note Forthcoming GNUs::.

   * `ffcall'	(SrcCD)

     `ffcall' is a C library for implementing foreign function calls in
     embedded interpreters by Bill Triggs and Bruno Haible.  It allows C
     functions with arbitrary argument lists and return types to be called or
     emulated (callbacks).

   * Fileutils	 (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     The Fileutils work on files: `chgrp', `chmod', `chown', `cp', `dd', `df',
     `dir', `du', `install', `ln', `ls', `mkdir', `mkfifo', `mknod', `mv',
     `rm', `rmdir', `sync', `touch', & `vdir'.

   * Findutils	 (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     `find' is frequently used both interactively and in shell scripts to
     find files which match certain criteria and perform arbitrary operations
     on them.  Also included are `locate', which scans a database for file
     names that match a pattern, and `xargs', which applies a command to a
     list of files.

   * Finger   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNU Finger has more features than other finger programs.  For sites with
     many hosts, a single host may be designated as the finger "server" host
     and other hosts at that site configured as finger "clients".  The server
     host collects information about who is logged in on the clients.  To
     finger a user at a GNU Finger site, a query to any of its client hosts
     gets useful information.  GNU Finger supports many customization
     features, including user output filters and site programmable output for
     special target names.

   * `flex'   (BinCD, DjgpD, DosBC, LangT, SrcCD, UtilD) [FSFman, FSFrc]

     `flex' is a replacement for the `lex' scanner generator.  `flex' was
     written by Vern Paxson of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and generates
     far more efficient scanners than `lex' does.  Sources for the `Flex
     Manual' and reference card are included (*note Documentation::.).

   * Fortran (`g77')   **Note Forthcoming GNUs::*   (LangT, SrcCD)

     GNU Fortran (`g77'), developed by Craig Burley, is available for public
     beta testing on the Internet.  For now, `g77' produces code that is
     mostly object-compatible with `f2c' & uses the same run-time library
     (`libf2c').

   * Fontutils	 (SrcCD, UtilT)

     The Fontutils convert between font formats, create fonts for use with
     Ghostscript or TeX (starting with a scanned type image & converting the
     bitmaps to outlines), et al.  It includes: `bpltobzr', `bzrto',
     `charspace', `fontconvert', `gsrenderfont', `imageto', `imgrotate',
     `limn', & `xbfe'.

   * GAWK   (DosBC, LangT, SrcCD) [FSFman]

     GAWK is upwardly compatible with the latest POSIX specification of
     `awk'.  It also provides several useful extensions not found in other
     `awk' implementations.  Texinfo source for the `GAWK Manual' comes with
     the software  (*note Documentation::.).

   * GCC   (BinCD, DjgpD, DosBC, LangT, SrcCD, VMSCmpT) [FSFman]

     Version 2 of the GNU C Compiler supports the languages C, C++, and
     Objective-C; the source file name suffix or a compiler option selects
     the language.  Objective-C support was donated by NeXT.  The runtime
     support needed to run Objective-C programs is now distributed with GCC
     (this does not include any Objective-C classes aside from `object', but
     see "GNUStep" in *Note Forthcoming GNUs::).  As much as possible, G++ is
     kept compatible with the evolving draft ANSI standard, but not with
     `cfront' (AT&T's compiler), which has been diverging from ANSI.

     The GNU C Compiler is a fairly portable optimizing compiler which
     performs automatic register allocation, common sub-expression
     elimination, invariant code motion from loops, induction variable
     optimizations, constant propagation and copy propagation, delayed
     popping of function call arguments, tail recursion elimination,
     integration of inline functions and frame pointer elimination,
     instruction scheduling, loop unrolling, filling of delay slots, leaf
     function optimization, optimized multiplication by constants, a certain
     amount of common subexpression elimination (CSE) between basic blocks
     (though not all of the supported machine descriptions provide for
     scheduling or delay slots), a feature for assigning attributes to
     instructions, and many local optimizations that are automatically
     deduced from the machine description.

     GCC can open-code most arithmetic on 64-bit values (type `long long
     int').  It supports extended floating point (type `long double') on the
     68k; other machines will follow.

     GCC supports full ANSI C, traditional C, & GNU C extensions (including:
     nested functions support, nonlocal gotos, & taking the address of a
     label).

     GCC can generate a.out, COFF, ELF, & OSF-Rose files when used with a
     suitable assembler.  It can produce debugging information in these
     formats: BSD stabs, COFF, ECOFF, ECOFF with stabs, & DWARF.

     GCC generates code for many CPUs, including the a29k, Alpha  ARM  AT&T
     DSP1610 Clipper Convex cN Elxsi Fujitsu Gmicro i370, i860, i960,
     MIL-STD-1750a, MIPS, ns32k, PDP-11, Pyramid, ROMP, RS/6000, SH, SPUR,
     Tahoe, VAX, & we32k.  Position-independent code is generated for the
     Clipper, Hitachi H8/300, HP-PA (1.0 & 1.1), i386/i486/Pentium, m68k,
     m88k, SPARC, & SPARClite.

     Operating systems supported include: GNU/Hurd, GNU/Linux, ACIS, AIX, AOS,
     BSD, Clix, Concentrix, Ctix, DG/UX, Dynix, FreeBSD, Genix, HP-UX, Irix,
     ISC, Luna, LynxOS, Minix, NetBSD, NewsOS, NeXTStep, OS/2, OSF, OSF-Rose,
     RISCOS, SCO, Solaris 2, SunOS 4, System/370, SysV, Ultrix, Unos, VMS, &
     Windows/NT.

     Using the configuration scheme for GCC, building a cross-compiler is as
     easy as building a native compiler.

     Version 1 of GCC, G++, & libg++ are no longer maintained.

     Texinfo source for the `Using and Porting GNU CC' manual, is included
     with GCC (*note Documentation::.).

     *Note Forthcoming GNUs::, for plans for later releases of GCC.

   * GDB   (BinCD, DjgpD, DosBC, LangT, SrcCD) [FSFman, FSFrc]

     GDB, the GNU DeBugger, is a source-level debugger for C, C++, & Fortran.

     GDB can debug both C and C++ programs, and will work with executables
     produced by many different compilers; however, C++ debugging will have
     some limitations if you do not use GCC.

     GDB has a command line user interface, and Emacs has a GDB mode.  Two X
     interfaces (not distributed or maintained by the FSF) are: `gdbtk' (FTP
     it from `ftp.cygnus.com' in directory `/pub/gdb'); and `xxgdb' (FTP it
     from `ftp.x.org' in directory `/contrib/utilities').

     Executable files and symbol tables are read via the BFD library, which
     allows a single copy of GDB to debug programs with multiple object file
     formats (e.g., a.out, COFF, ELF).	Other features include a rich command
     language, remote debugging over serial lines or TCP/IP, and watchpoints
     (breakpoints triggered when the value of an expression changes).

     GDB uses a standard remote interface to a simulator library which (so
     far) has simulators for the Hitachi H8/300, H8/500, Super-H, & Zilog
     Z8001/2.

     GDB can perform cross-debugging.  To say that GDB "targets" a platform
     means it can perform native or cross-debugging for it.  To say that GDB
     can "host" a given platform means that it can be built on it, but cannot
     necessarily debug native programs.

     GDB can:

	* "target" & "host": Amiga 3000 (Amix), DEC Alpha (OSF/1), DECstation
	  3100 & 5000 (Ultrix), HP 9000/300 (BSD, HP-UX), HP 9000/700 (HP-UX
	  9, 10), i386 (GNU/Hurd, GNU/Linux, BSD, FreeBSD, LynxOS, NetBSD,
	  SCO), IBM RS/6000 (AIX, LynxOS), Motorola Delta m88k (System V,
	  CX/UX), PC532 (NetBSD), Motorola m68k MVME-167 (LynxOS), NCR 3000
	  (SVR4), SGI (Irix V3, V4, V5), SONY News (NewsOS 3.x), SPARC
	  (LynxOS, NetBSD, Solaris, & SunOS 4.1 ) Sun-3 (SunOS 4.1), &
	  Ultracomputer (a29k running Sym1).

	* "target", but not "host": AMD 29000 (COFF & a.out), Hitachi H8/300,
	  Hitachi SH, i386 (a.out, COFF, OS/9000), i960 (Nindy, VxWorks),
	  m68k/m68332 (a.out, COFF, VxWorks), MIPS (ELF, IDT ecoff), Fujitsu
	  SPARClite (a.out, COFF), & Z8000.

	* "host", but not "target": IBM RT/PC (AIX), HP/Apollo 68k (BSD), &
	  Apple Macintosh (MacOS).

     Sources for the manual, `Debugging with GDB', and a reference card are
     included (*note Documentation::.).

   * `gdbm'   (LangT, SrcCD, UtilD)

     `gdbm' is the GNU replacement for the traditional `dbm' and `ndbm'
     libraries.	 It implements a database using quick lookup by hashing.
     `gdbm' does not ordinarily make sparse files (unlike its Unix and BSD
     counterparts).

   * `gettext'	 (LangT, SrcCD)

     The GNU `gettext' tool set contains everything maintainers need to
     internationalize a package for messages, tools that help translators
     localize messages to their native language, once a package has been
     internationalized.	 *Note Help the GNU Translation Project::.

   * Ghostscript   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     The GNU release of Ghostscript is an interpreter for the Postscript
     graphics language (*note Forthcoming GNUs::., for future plans).

     The current version of GNU Ghostscript is 2.6.2.  Features include the
     ability to use the fonts provided by the platform on which Ghostscript
     runs (X Window System & Microsoft (MS) Windows), resulting in much
     better-looking screen displays; improved text file printing (like
     `enscript'); a utility to extract the text from a Postscript language
     document; a much more reliable (and faster) MS Windows implementation;
     support for MS C/C++ 7.0; drivers for many new printers ( e.g. the
     SPARCprinter), & for TIFF/F (Fax) file format; many more Postscript Level
     2 facilities, including most of the color space facilities (but not
     patterns); & the ability to switch between Level 1 & Level 2
     dynamically.  Version 2.6.2 adds a LaserJet 4 driver & several important
     bug fixes to version 2.6.1.

     Ghostscript executes commands in the Postscript language by writing
     directly to a printer, drawing on an X window, or writing to files for
     printing later or manipulating with other graphics programs.

     Ghostscript includes a C-callable graphics library (for client programs
     that do not want to deal with the Postscript language).  It also supports
     i386/i486/Pentiums running MS-DOS with EGA, VGA or SuperVGA graphics (but
     please do *not* ask the FSF staff any questions about this; we do not
     use MS-DOS).

   * Ghostview	 (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     Tim Theisen, `ghostview@cs.wisc.edu', created Ghostview, a previewer for
     multi-page files with an X Window interface.  Ghostview & Ghostscript
     work together; Ghostview creates a viewing window & Ghostscript draws in
     it.

   * GIT   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     GIT is a set of interactive tools: an extensible file system browser, an
     ASCII/hex file viewer, a process viewer/killer, & other related
     utilities & shell scripts.	 It can be used to increase the speed &
     efficiency of many daily tasks, such as copying & moving files &
     directories, invoking editors, compressing/uncompressing files, creating
     & expanding archives, compiling programs, sending mail, etc.  It looks
     nice, has colors (if the standard ANSI color sequences are supported), &
     is user-friendly.

   * `gmp'    **Note Forthcoming GNUs::*   (LangT, SrcCD)

     GNU `mp' is a library for arbitrary precision arithmetic on signed
     integers and rational numbers.  It has a rich set of functions with a
     regular interface.

   * GN	  (SrcCD)

     GN is a gopher/HTTP server.  It recognizes whether the request came from
     an HTTP (World Wide Web) or gopher client and responds accordingly.

   * Gnans    (SrcCD)

     Gnans is a program (and language) for the numerical study of
     deterministic and stochastic dynamical systems.  The dynamical systems
     may evolve in continuous or discrete time.	 Gnans has graphical &
     command line interfaces.

   * GNATS   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNATS (GNats: A Tracking System, not to be confused with GNAT, The GNU
     Ada Translator) is a bug-tracking system.	It is based upon the paradigm
     of a central site or organization which receives problem reports and
     negotiates their resolution by electronic mail.  Although it has been
     used primarily as a software bug-tracking system so far, it is
     sufficiently generalized that it could be used for handling system
     administration issues, project management, or any number of other
     applications.

   * `gnuplot'	 (SrcCD, UtilT, WdwsD)

     `gnuplot' is an interactive program for plotting mathematical
     expressions and data.  It plots both curves (2 dimensions) & surfaces (3
     dimensions).  Curiously, it was neither written nor named for the GNU
     Project; the name is a coincidence.  Various GNU programs use `gnuplot'.

   * `gnuserv'	 (LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     `gnuserv' is a enhanced version of Emacs' `emacsclient' program.  It
     lets the user direct a running Emacs to edit files or evaluate arbitrary
     Emacs Lisp constructs from another process.

   * GnuGo   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     GnuGo plays the game of Go (Wei-Chi); version 1.2 was released with minor
     changes for portability,  but it is not yet very sophisticated.

   * `gperf'   (LangT, SrcCD)

     `gperf' generates perfect hash tables.  The C version is in package
     cperf.  The C++ version is in libg++.  Both produce hash functions in
     either C or C++.

   * Graphics	(SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNU Graphics produces x-y plots from ASCII or binary data.	 It outputs
     in Postscript, Tektronix 4010 compatible, and Unix device-independent
     "plot" formats.  It has a previewer for the X Window System.  Features
     include a `spline' interpolation program; examples of shell scripts
     using `graph' and `plot'; a statistics toolkit; and output in TekniCAD
     TDA and ln03 file formats.	 Email bugs or queries to Rich Murphey,
     `Rich@lamprey.utmb.edu'.

   * grep   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     This package has GNU `grep', `egrep', and `fgrep', which find lines that
     match entered patterns.  They are much faster than the traditional Unix
     versions.

   * Groff   (DjgpD, DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     Groff is a document formatting system based on a device-independent
     version of `troff' & includes: `eqn', `nroff', `pic', `refer', `tbl',
     `troff'; the `man', `ms', & `mm' macros; & drivers for Postscript, TeX
     `dvi' format, and typewriter-like devices.	 Groff's `mm' macro package
     is almost compatible with the DWB `mm' macros with several extensions.
     Also included is a modified version of the Berkeley `me' macros and an
     enhanced version of the X11 `xditview' previewer.	A driver for the
     LaserJet 4 series of printers is currently in test.  Written in C++,
     these programs can be compiled with GNU C++ Version 2.5 or later.

     Groff users are encouraged to contribute enhancements.  Most needed are
     complete Texinfo documentation, a `grap' emulation (a `pic' preprocessor
     for typesetting graphs), a page-makeup postprocessor similar to `pm'
     (see `Computing Systems', Vol. 2, No. 2; ask `office@usenix.org' how to
     get a copy), and an ASCII output class for `pic' to integrate `pic' with
     Texinfo.  Questions and bug reports from users who have read the
     documentation provided with Groff can be sent to
     `bug-groff@prep.ai.mit.edu'.

   * `gzip'   (DjgpD, DosBC, LangT, LspEmcT, SrcCD, UtilT)

     `gzip' can expand LZW-compressed files but uses another, unpatented
     algorithm for compression which generally produces better results.	 It
     also expands files compressed with System V's `pack' program.

   * `hello'   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     The GNU `hello' program produces a familiar, friendly greeting.  It
     allows non-programmers to use a classic computer science tool which would
     otherwise be unavailable to them.	Because it is protected by the GNU
     General Public License, users are free to share and change it.  `hello'
     is also a good example of a program that meets the GNU coding standards.

     Like any truly useful program, `hello' contains a built-in mail reader.

   * `hp2xx'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNU `hp2xx' reads HP-GL files, decomposes all drawing commands into
     elementary vectors, and converts them into a variety of vector and raster
     output formats.  It is also an HP-GL previewer.  Currently supported
     vector formats include encapsulated Postscript, Uniplex RGIP, Metafont,
     various special TeX-related formats, and simplified HP-GL (line drawing
     only) for imports.	 Raster formats supported include IMG, PBM, PCX, &
     HP-PCL (including Deskjet & DJ5xxC support).  Previewers work under X11
     (Unix), OS/2 (PM & full screen), & MS-DOS (SVGA, VGA, & HGC).

   * HylaFAX   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     HylaFAX (once named FlexFAX) is a facsimile system for Unix systems.  It
     supports sending, receiving, & polled retrieval of facsimile, as well as
     transparent shared data use of the modem.

     Details are available on the World Wide Web at:
     `http://www.vix.com/hylafax/'.

   * Hyperbole	 (LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     Hyperbole, written by Bob Weiner in Emacs Lisp, is an open, efficient,
     programmable information management & hypertext system, intended for
     everyday work on any platform supported by Emacs.

   * `indent'	(DosBC, LangT, SrcCD, UtilD)

     GNU `indent' formats C source code into the GNU indentation style.	 It
     also has options to output BSD, K&R, or your own special style.  GNU
     `indent' is more robust & provides more functionality than other such
     programs, including handling C++ comments.	 It runs on a number of
     systems, including DOS & VMS.

     The next version will also format C++ source code.

   * Ispell   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     Ispell is an interactive spell checker that suggests "near misses" to
     replace unrecognized words.  System & user-maintained dictionaries for
     multiple languages can be used.  Standalone & Emacs interfaces are
     available.

     Previously, the FSF had its own version of Ispell ("Ispell 4.0"), but
     has dropped it for a parallel branch that has had more development
     ("Ispell 3.1").  (Ispell 3 was an earlier release by the original Ispell
     author, but others have since made it more sophisticated.)

   * JACAL   *Not available from the FSF except by FTP*

     JACAL is a symbolic mathematics system for the manipulation and
     simplification of algebraic equations and expressions.  New in JACAL is
     multivariate factoring from Michael Thomas `(mjt@octavia.anu.edu.au)'.
     See JACAL's documentation at `http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/~jaffer/'.

     JACAL is written in Scheme using the SLIB portable Scheme Library.	 It
     comes with SCM, an IEEE P1178 & R4RS compliant version of Scheme written
     in C.  SCM runs on Amiga, Atari-ST, MS-DOS, OS/2, NOS/VE, Unicos, VMS,
     Unix, & similar systems.

     The FSF is not distributing JACAL on any physical media.  To get an IBM
     PC floppy disk with the freely redistributable source & executable
     files, send $99.00 to:

	  Aubrey Jaffer
	  84 Pleasant Street
	  Wakefield, MA	  01880-1846
	  USA

   * `less'   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilD, UtilT)

     `less' is a display paginator similar to `more' and `pg', but with
     various features (such as the ability to scroll backwards) that most
     pagers lack.

   * `m4'   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilD, UtilT)

     GNU `m4' is an implementation of the traditional Unix macro processor.
     It is mostly SVR4 compatible, although it has some extensions (e.g.,
     handling more than 9 positional parameters to macros).  `m4' also has
     built-in functions for including files, running shell commands, doing
     arithmetic, etc.

   * `make' (BinCD,DjgpD,DosBC,LangT,LspEmcT,SrcCD,UtilD,UtilT)[FSFman]

     GNU `make' supports POSIX 1003.2 and has all but a few obscure features
     of the BSD and System V versions of `make'.  GNU extensions include long
     options, parallel compilation, flexible implicit pattern rules,
     conditional execution, & powerful text manipulation functions.  Texinfo
     source for the `Make Manual' comes with the program (*note
     Documentation::.).

   * MandelSpawn   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     A parallel Mandelbrot generation program for the X Window System.

   * Midnight Commander (`mc')	 (SrcCD, UtilT)

     The Midnight Commander is a user friendly and colorful Unix file manager
     and shell, useful to novice and guru alike.  It has a built-in virtual
     file system that allows the user to manipulate files inside tar files
     (both regular and compressed) or files on remote machines using the FTP
     protocol.

   * `mkisofs'	 (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `mkisofs' is a pre-mastering program to generate an ISO 9660 file system.
     It takes a snapshot of a directory tree, and makes a binary image which
     corresponds to an ISO 9660 file system when written to a block device.

     It can also generate the System Use Sharing Protocol records of the Rock
     Ridge Interchange Protocol (used to further describe the files in an ISO
     9660 file system to a Unix host; it provides information such as longer
     filenames, uid/gid, permissions, and device nodes).

     Also included is `cdwrite', which can take an image from `mkisofs' and
     write it to a Phillips CD recorder system attached to a GNU/Linux system.

   * mtools   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     mtools is a set of public domain programs to allow Unix systems to read,
     write, and manipulate files on an MS-DOS file system (usually a
     diskette).

   * MULE   (DosBC, EmcsD, LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     MULE is a MULtilingual Enhancement to GNU Emacs.  MULE text buffers can
     contain a mix of characters from many languages including: Japanese,
     Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, Thai, modern European languages (including
     Greek & Russian), Arabic, & Hebrew.  MULE also provides input methods
     for all of them.  MULE is being merged into GNU Emacs.  *Note GNU &
     Other Free Software in Japan::, for more information about MULE.

   * `ncurses'	 (LangT, SrcCD)

     `ncurses' is an implementation of the Unix `curses' library for
     developing screen based programs that are terminal independent.

   * NetHack   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     NetHack is a Rogue-like adventure game supporting character & X displays.

   * NIH Class Library	 (LangT, SrcCD)

     The NIH Class Library (once known as "OOPS", Object-Oriented Program
     Support) is a portable collection of C++ classes (similar to those in
     Smalltalk-80) written in C++ by Keith Gorlen of the National Institutes
     of Health (NIH).

   * `nvi'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `nvi' is a free implementation of the `vi'/`ex' Unix editor.  It has
     most of the functionality of the original `vi'/`ex', except "open" mode
     & the `lisp' option, which will be added.	Enhancements over `vi'/`ex'
     include split screens with multiple buffers, handling 8-bit data,
     infinite file & line lengths, tag stacks, infinite undo, & extended
     regular expressions.  It runs under GNU/Linux, BSD, NetBSD, FreeBSD,
     BSDI, AIX, HP-UX, DGUX, IRIX, PSF, PTX, Solaris, SunOS, Ultrix, and
     Unixware, & should port easily to other systems.

   * Oaklisp	(SrcCD)

     Oaklisp is a fast, portable, object-oriented Scheme with first class
     types.

   * Objective-C Library   **Note Forthcoming GNUs::*	(LangT, SrcCD)

     Our Objective-C Class Library (`libobjects') has general-purpose,
     non-graphical Objective-C objects written by Andrew McCallum & other
     volunteers.  It includes collection classes for using groups of objects
     & C types, I/O streams, coders for formatting objects & C types to
     streams, ports for network packet transmission, distributed objects
     (remote object messaging), string classes, exceptions, pseudo-random
     number generators, & time handling facilities.  It also includes the
     foundation classes for the GNUStep project; over 70 of them have already
     been implemented.	The library is known to work on i386/i486/Pentiums,
     m68k, SPARC, MIPS, HPPA, & RS/6000.  Send queries & bug reports to
     `mccallum@gnu.ai.mit.edu'.

   * OBST   (LangT, SrcCD)

     OBST is a persistent object management system with bindings to C++.
     OBST supports incremental loading of methods.  Its graphical tools
     require the X Window System.  It features a hands-on tutorial including
     sample programs.  It compiles with G++, and should install easily on
     most Unix platforms.

   * Octave   (LangT, SrcCD)

     Octave is a high-level language similar to MATLAB, primarily intended
     for numerical computations.  It has a convenient command line interface
     for solving linear & nonlinear problems numerically.

     Octave does arithmetic for real and complex scalars and matrices, solves
     sets of nonlinear algebraic equations, integrates systems of ordinary
     differential & differential-algebraic equations, and integrates
     functions over finite & infinite intervals.  Two- & three-dimensional
     plotting is available using `gnuplot'.

     Send queries and bug reports to: `bug-octave@bevo.che.wisc.edu'.

     Texinfo source is included for a 220+ page Octave manual, not yet
     published by the FSF.

   * Oleo   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     Oleo is a spreadsheet program (better for you than the more expensive
     spreadsheets).  It supports the X Window System and character-based
     terminals, and can output Embedded Postscript renditions of spreadsheets.
     Keybindings should be familiar to Emacs users and are configurable.
     Oleo supports multiple variable-width fonts when used under the X Window
     System or outputting to Postscript devices.

   * `p2c'   (LangT, SrcCD)

     `p2c' is Dave Gillespie's Pascal-to-C translator.	It inputs many
     different dialects (HP, ISO, Turbo, VAX, et al.) and generates readable,
     maintainable, portable C.

   * `patch'   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     `patch' is our version of Larry Wall's program to take `diff''s output
     and apply those differences to an original file to generate the modified
     version.

   * PCL   (LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     PCL is a free implementation of a large subset of CLOS, the Common Lisp
     Object System.  It runs under both GCL and CLISP, mentioned above.

   * `perl'   (DosBC, LangT, SrcCD)

     Larry Wall's `perl' combines the features and capabilities of `sed',
     `awk', `sh', and C.  It also provides interfaces to the Unix system
     calls and many C library routines.

   * `pine'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `pine' is a friendly menu-driven electronic mail manager and user
     interface .

   * `ptx'    **Note Forthcoming GNUs::*   (SrcCD, UtilD, UtilT)

     GNU `ptx' is our version of the traditional permuted index generator.
     It handles multiple input files at once, produces TeX compatible output,
     and generates readable "KWIC" (KeyWords In Context) indexes without
     using `nroff'.

     It does not yet handle input files that do not fit in memory all at once.

   * `rc'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `rc' is a shell that features a C-like syntax (much more so than `csh')
     and far cleaner quoting rules than the C or Bourne shells.	 It's
     intended to be used interactively, but is also great for writing
     scripts.  It inspired the shell `es'.

   * RCS   (SrcCD, UtilD, UtilT)

     RCS, the Revision Control System, is used for version control &
     management of software projects.  Used with GNU `diff', RCS can handle
     binary files (executables, object files, 8-bit data, etc).	 RCS now
     conforms to GNU configuration standards and to POSIX 1003.1b-1993.	 Also
     see the CVS item above.

   * `recode'	 **Note Forthcoming GNUs::*   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNU `recode' converts files between character sets and usages.  When
     exact transliterations are not possible, it may delete the offending
     characters or fall back on approximations.	 This program recognizes or
     outputs nearly 150 different character sets and is able to transliterate
     files between almost any pair.  Most RFC 1345 character sets are
     supported.

   * `regex'   (LangT, SrcCD)

     The GNU regular expression library supports POSIX.2, except for
     internationalization features.  It is included in many GNU programs which
     do regular expression matching & is available separately.	An alternate
     regular expression package, `rx', is faster than `regex' in most cases &
     will replace `regex' over time.

   * `rx'   (LangT, SrcCD)

     Tom Lord has written `rx', a new regular expression library which is
     faster than the older GNU `regex' library.	 It is now being distributed
     with `sed' and `tar'.  `rx' will be used in the next releases of `m4'
     and `ptx'.

   * SAOimage	(SrcCD, UtilT)

     SAOimage is an X-based astronomical image viewer.	It reads data images
     and displays them with a pseudocolor colormap.  There is full interactive
     control of the colormap, reading, and writing of colormaps, etc.

   * Scheme   *For more information, see *Note Scheme Tape::*	(SrcCD, SchmT)

   * `screen'	(SrcCD, UtilT)

     `screen' is a terminal multiplexer that runs several separate "screens"
     (ttys) on a single character-based terminal.  Each virtual terminal
     emulates a DEC VT100 plus several ISO 2022 and ISO 6429 (ECMA 48, ANSI
     X3.64) functions, including color.	 Arbitrary keyboard input translation
     is also supported.	 `screen' sessions can be detached and resumed later
     on a different terminal type.  Output in detached sessions is saved for
     later viewing.

   * `sed'   (DjgpD, DosBC, SrcCD, UtilD, UtilT)

     `sed' is a stream-oriented version of `ed'.  It comes with the `rx'
     library.

   * Sharutils	 (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `shar' makes so-called shell archives out of many files, preparing them
     for transmission by electronic mail services; `unshar' helps unpack
     these shell archives after reception.  `uuencode' and `uudecode' are
     POSIX compliant implementations of a pair of programs to transform files
     into a format that can be safely transmitted across a 7-bit ASCII link.

   * Shellutils	  (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     They are: `basename', `date', `dirname', `echo', `env', `expr', `false',
     `groups', `hostname', `id', `logname', `nice', `nohup', `pathchk',
     `printenv', `printf', `pwd', `sleep', `stty', `su', `tee', `test',
     `true', `tty', `uname', `users', `who', `whoami', & `yes'.

   * Shogi   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     Shogi is a Japanese game similar to Chess; a major difference is that
     captured pieces can be returned into play.

     GNU Shogi is a variant of GNU Chess; it implements the same features &
     similar heuristics.  As a new feature, sequences of partial board
     patterns can be introduced to help the program play toward specific
     opening patterns.	It has both character and X display interfaces.

     It is primarily supported by Matthias Mutz on behalf of the FSF.

   * SIPP    (SrcCD)

     SIPP is a library for creating photorealistic renderings of 3D scenes.
     A scene is built up of objects which can be transformed with rotation,
     translation, and scaling.	The objects form hierarchies where each object
     can have arbitrarily many subobjects and subsurfaces.  A surface is a
     number of connected polygons which are rendered with either Phong,
     Gouraud, or flat shading.	The library supports programmable shaders and
     texture mapping with textures in up to 3 dimensions and automatic
     interpolation of texture coordinates.  A scene can be illuminated by an
     arbitrary number of light sources.	 The lights from some of them are
     capable of casting shadows of objects.

   * Smalltalk	 *Also see *Note Forthcoming GNUs::*   (LangT,SrcCD)

     GNU Smalltalk is an interpreted object-oriented programming language
     system written in highly portable C.  It has been ported to many Unix,
     DOS, & other OSes.	 Features include a binary image save capability, the
     ability to call user-written C code with parameters, an Emacs editing
     mode, a version of the X protocol invocable from Smalltalk, optional
     byte-code compilation and/or execution tracing, & automatically loaded
     per-user initialization files.  It implements all of the classes &
     protocol in the book "Smalltalk-80: The Language", except for the
     graphic user interface (GUI) related classes.

   * SNePS    (SrcCD)

     SNePS is the Semantic Network Processing System.  It is an
     implementation of a fully intensional theory of propositional knowledge
     representation and reasoning.  SNePS runs under CLISP or GCL.

   * Spinner   (SrcCD)

     Spinner is a modularized, object oriented, non-forking World Wide Web
     server with high performance and throughput.

   * Superopt	(LangT, SrcCD)

     Superopt is a function sequence generator that uses an exhaustive
     generate-and-test approach to find the shortest instruction sequence for
     a given function.	You provide a function as input, a CPU to generate
     code for, and how many instructions you want.  Its use in GCC is
     described in the `ACM SIGPLAN PLDI'92 Proceedings'.  It supports: SPARC,
     m68k, m68020, m88k, IBM POWER and PowerPC, AMD 29k, Intel x86 and 960,
     Pyramid, DEC Alpha, Hitachi SH, & HP-PA.

   * `tar'   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNU `tar' includes multi-volume support, the ability to archive sparse
     files, compression/decompression, remote archives, and special features
     that allow `tar' to be used for incremental and full backups.  GNU `tar'
     uses an early draft of the POSIX 1003.1 `ustar' format which is
     different from the final version.	This will be corrected in the future.

   * Termcap Library   (SrcCD, UtilT) [FSFman]

     The GNU Termcap library is a drop-in replacement for `libtermcap.a' on
     any system.  It does not place an arbitrary limit on the size of Termcap
     entries, unlike most other Termcap libraries.  Included is source for the
     `Termcap Manual' in Texinfo format (*note Documentation::.).

   * Termutils	 (SrcCD, UtilT)

     The Termutils package contains programs for controlling terminals.
     `tput' is a portable way for shell scripts to use special terminal
     capabilities.  `tabs' is a program to set hardware terminal tab settings.

   * TeX   (DosBC, SrcCD)

     TeX is a document formatting system that handles complicated
     typesetting, including mathematics.  It is GNU's standard text formatter.

     The University of Washington maintains & supports a tape distribution of
     TeX for Unix systems.  The core material is Karl Berry's `web2c' TeX
     package.  Sources are available via anonymous ftp; retrieval
     instructions are in `/pub/tex/unixtex.ftp' on `ftp.cs.umb.edu'.  If you
     receive any installation support from the University of Washington,
     consider sending them a donation.

     To order a full distribution written in `tar' on either a 1/4inch
     4-track QIC-24 cartridge or a 4mm DAT cartridge, send $210.00 to:

	  Pierre A. MacKay
	  Department of Classics
	  DH-10, Denny Hall 218
	  University of Washington
	  Seattle, WA	98195
	  USA

	  Electronic-Mail: `mackay@cs.washington.edu'
	  Telephone: +1-206-543-2268

     Please make checks payable to: `University of Washington'.	 Do not
     specify any other payee.  That causes accounting problems.	 Checks must
     be in U.S. dollars, drawn on a U.S. bank.	Only prepaid orders can be
     handled.  Overseas sites: please add to the base cost $20.00 to ship via
     air parcel post or $30.00 to ship via courier.  Please check with the
     above for current prices & formats.

   * Texinfo   (DjgpD,DosBC,LangT,LspEmcT,SrcCD,UtilD,UtilT)[FSFman]

     Texinfo is a set of utilities (`makeinfo', `info', `texi2dvi',
     `texindex', `tex2patch', & `fixfonts') which generate both printed
     manuals & online hypertext documentation (called "Info"), & can read
     online Info documents.  Version 3 has both Emacs Lisp & standalone
     programs written in C or shell script.  Texinfo mode for Emacs enables
     easy editing & updating of Texinfo files.	Source for the `Texinfo
     Manual' is included (*note Documentation::.).

   * Textutils	 (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     The Textutils programs manipulate textual data.  They include: `cat',
     `cksum', `comm', `csplit', `cut', `expand', `fmt', `fold', `head',
     `join', `md5sum', `nl', `od', `paste', `pr', `sort', `split', `sum',
     `tac', `tail', `tr', `unexpand', `uniq', and `wc'.

   * Tile Forth	  (LangT, SrcCD)

     Tile Forth is a 32-bit implementation of the Forth-83 standard written
     in C, allowing it to be easily ported to new systems and extended with
     any C-function (graphics, windowing, etc).

     Many documented Forth libraries are available, including ones for
     top-down parsing, multi-threads, & object oriented programming.

   * `time'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `time' reports (usually from a shell) the user, system, & real time used
     by a process.  On some systems it also reports memory usage, page
     faults, etc.

   * `ucblogo'	 (LangT, SrcCD)

     `ucblogo' implements the classic teaching language, Logo.

   * UUCP   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     GNU's UUCP system (written by Ian Lance Taylor) supports the `f', `g',
     `v' (all window & packet sizes), `G', `t', `e', Zmodem, & two new
     bidirectional (`i' & `j') protocols.  With a BSD sockets library, it can
     make TCP connections.  With TLI libraries, it can make TLI connections.
     Source is included for a manual (not yet published by the FSF).

   * W3	  (LspEmcT, SrcCD)

     W3 (written by William Perry in Emacs Lisp) is an extensible, advanced
     World Wide Web browser that runs as part of GNU Emacs.  It understands
     many protocols: FTP, gopher, HTML, SMTP, Telnet, WAIS, et al.

   * `wdiff'   (DosBC, SrcCD, UtilT)

     `wdiff' is a front-end to GNU `diff'.  It compares two files, finding
     the words deleted or added to the first to make the second.  It has many
     output formats and works well with terminals and pagers.  `wdiff' is
     very useful when two texts differ only by a few words and paragraphs
     have been refilled.

   * X11   *For details, see *Note X11 Tapes::*	  (SrcCD, X11OptT, X11ReqT)

   * `xboard', `xshogi'	  (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `xboard' is an X Window interface to GNU Chess.  `xshogi' is an X Window
     interface to GNU Shogi.  They use the R4 Athena widgets and Xt
     Intrinsics to provide an interactive referee for managing a game between
     a user & a computer opponent, or between two computers.  You can also use
     `xboard' without GNU Chess to play through games in files or to play
     through games manually (force mode); in this case, moves aren't
     validated.

   * `xgrabsc'	 (SrcCD)

     `xgrabsc' is a screen capture program similar to `xwd' but providing
     more ways of selecting the part of the screen to capture and different
     types of output: Postscript, color Postscript, xwd, bitmap, pixmap, and
     puzzle.

   * `Ygl'   (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `Ygl' emulates a subset of SGI's GL (Graphics Language) library under
     X11 on GNU/Linux with XFree, AIX 3.2, ConvexOS, HP-UX, SunOS, et al.  It
     has most two-dimensional graphics routines, the queue device & query
     routines, double buffering, RGB mode with dithering, FORTRAN bindings,
     at al.



Program/Package Cross Reference
*******************************

Here is a list of what package each GNU program or library is in.  You can FTP
the current list in the file `/pub/gnu/ProgramIndex' from a GNU FTP host
(listed in *Note How to Get GNU Software::).

	* a2p perl
	* a2x xopt
	* ac bsd44
	* accton bsd44
	* ackpfd phttpd
	* acl bsd44
	* acm acm
	* acms acm
	* addftinfo Groff
	* adventure bsd44
	* afm2tfm TeX
	* amd bsd44
	* ansitape bsd44
	* AnswerGarden xopt
	* apply bsd44
	* appres xreq
	* apropos bsd44
	* ar Binutils
	* arithmetic bsd44
	* arp bsd44
	* atc bsd44
	* autoconf Autoconf
	* autoheader Autoconf
	* autoreconf Autoconf
	* autoscan Autoconf
	* autoupdate Autoconf
	* auto_box xopt
	* auto_box xreq

	* b2m Emacs
	* backgammon bsd44
	* bad144 bsd44
	* badsect bsd44
	* banner bsd44
	* basename Shellutils
	* bash BASH
	* battlestar bsd44
	* bc bc
	* bcd bsd44
	* bdes bsd44
	* bdftops Ghostscript
	* beach_ball xopt
	* beach_ball xreq
	* beach_ball2 xopt
	* bibtex TeX
	* biff bsd44
	* bison Bison
	* bitmap xreq
	* boggle bsd44
	* bpltobzr Fontutils
	* bugfiler bsd44
	* buildhash Ispell
	* bzrto Fontutils

	* c++ GCC
	* c++filt Binutils
	* c2ph perl
	* ca100 xopt
	* caesar bsd44
	* cal bsd44
	* calendar bsd44
	* canfield bsd44
	* cat Textutils
	* cbars wdiff
	* cc GCC
	* cc1 GCC
	* cc1obj GCC
	* cc1plus GCC
	* cccp GCC
	* cdwrite mkisofs
	* cfengine cfengine
	* cgi Spinner
	* charspace Fontutils
	* checknr bsd44
	* chess bsd44
	* chflags bsd44
	* chgrp Fileutils
	* ching bsd44
	* chmod Fileutils
	* chown Fileutils
	* chpass bsd44
	* chroot bsd44
	* ci RCS
	* cksum Textutils
	* cktyps g77
	* clisp CLISP
	* clri bsd44
	* cmail xboard
	* cmmf TeX
	* cmodext xopt
	* cmp Diffutils
	* co RCS
	* col bsd44
	* colcrt bsd44
	* colrm bsd44
	* column bsd44
	* comm Textutils
	* compress bsd44
	* comsat bsd44
	* connectd bsd44
	* cp Fileutils
	* cpicker xopt
	* cpio cpio
	* cpp GCC
	* cppstdin perl
	* cribbage bsd44
	* crock xopt
	* csh bsd44
	* csplit Textutils
	* ctags Emacs
	* ctwm xopt
	* cu UUCP
	* cut Textutils
	* cvs CVS
	* cvscheck CVS
	* cvtmail Emacs
	* cxterm xopt

	* d Fileutils
	* date Shellutils
	* dc bc
	* dd Fileutils
	* ddd DDD
	* delatex TeX
	* demangle Binutils
	* descend CVS
	* detex TeX
	* df Fileutils
	* dhtppd phttpd
	* diff Diffutils
	* diff3 Diffutils
	* digest-doc Emacs
	* dipress bsd44
	* dir Fileutils
	* dirname Shellutils
	* dish xopt
	* disklabel bsd44
	* diskpart bsd44
	* dld dld
	* dm bsd44
	* dmesg bsd44
	* doschk doschk
	* dox xopt
	* du Fileutils
	* dump bsd44
	* dump mkisofs
	* dumpfs bsd44
	* dvi2tty TeX
	* dvicopy TeX
	* dvips TeX
	* dvitype TeX

	* ecc ecc
	* echo Shellutils
	* ed ed
	* edit-pr GNATS
	* editres xreq
	* edquota bsd44
	* eeprom bsd44
	* egrep grep
	* emacs Emacs
	* emacsclient Emacs
	* emacsserver Emacs
	* emacstool Emacs
	* emu xopt
	* env Shellutils
	* eqn Groff
	* error bsd44
	* es es
	* esdebug es
	* etags Emacs
	* ex nvi
	* expand Textutils
	* expect DejaGnu
	* expr Shellutils
	* exterm xopt

	* f2c f2c
	* factor bsd44
	* fakemail Emacs
	* false Shellutils
	* fastboot bsd44
	* fax2ps HylaFAX
	* faxalter HylaFAX
	* faxanswer HylaFAX
	* faxcover HylaFAX
	* faxd HylaFAX
	* faxd.recv HylaFAX
	* faxmail HylaFAX
	* faxquit HylaFAX
	* faxrcvd HylaFAX
	* faxrm HylaFAX
	* faxstat HylaFAX
	* fc f2c
	* fdraw xopt
	* ffe g77
	* fgrep grep
	* file bsd44
	* find Findutils
	* find2perl perl
	* finger Finger
	* fingerd Finger
	* fish bsd44
	* fixfonts Texinfo
	* fixinc.svr4 GCC
	* fixincludes GCC
	* flex flex
	* flex++ flex
	* fmt bsd44
	* fold Textutils
	* font2c Ghostscript
	* fontconvert Fontutils
	* forth Tile Forth
	* forthicon Tile Forth
	* forthtool Tile Forth
	* fortune bsd44
	* fpr bsd44
	* freq Ispell
	* freqtbl Ispell
	* from bsd44
	* fsck bsd44
	* fsplit bsd44
	* fstat bsd44
	* ftp bsd44
	* ftpd bsd44

	* g++ GCC
	* gas Binutils
	* gawk GAWK
	* gcc GCC
	* gcore bsd44
	* gdb GDB
	* genclass libg++
	* gettext gettext
	* getty bsd44
	* gftodvi TeX
	* gftopk TeX
	* gftype TeX
	* ghostview Ghostview
	* git GIT
	* gitaction GIT
	* gitcmp GIT
	* gitkeys GIT
	* gitmatch GIT
	* gitmount GIT
	* gitps GIT
	* gitredir GIT
	* gitrgrep GIT
	* gitview GIT
	* gitwipe GIT
	* gn GN
	* gnans Gnans
	* gnanslator Gnans
	* gnats GNATS
	* gnuchess Chess
	* gnuchessc Chess
	* gnuchessn Chess
	* gnuchessr Chess
	* gnuchessx Chess
	* gnuclient gnuserv
	* gnudoit gnuserv
	* gnupdisp Shogi
	* gnuplot gnuplot
	* gnuplot_x11 gnuplot
	* gnuserv gnuserv
	* gnushogi Shogi
	* gnushogir Shogi
	* gnushogix Shogi
	* go GnuGo
	* gpc xopt
	* gpc xreq
	* gperf cperf
	* gperf libg++
	* gprof Binutils
	* graph Graphics
	* grep grep
	* grodvi Groff
	* groff Groff
	* grops Groff
	* grotty Groff
	* groups Shellutils
	* gs Ghostscript
	* gsbj Ghostscript
	* gsdj Ghostscript
	* gslj Ghostscript
	* gslp Ghostscript
	* gsnd Ghostscript
	* gsrenderfont Fontutils
	* gunzip gzip
	* gwm xopt
	* gzexe gzip
	* gzip gzip

	* h2ph perl
	* h2pl perl
	* hack bsd44
	* hangman bsd44
	* head Textutils
	* hello hello
	* hexdump bsd44
	* hexl Emacs
	* hostname Shellutils
	* hp2xx hp2xx
	* hterm xopt
	* htmlencode phttpd
	* httpd apache
	* httpdecode phttpd

	* i18nOlwmV2 xopt
	* i2mif xopt
	* ico xopt
	* ico xreq
	* id Shellutils
	* ident RCS
	* ifconfig bsd44
	* ifnames Autoconf
	* ImageMagick xopt
	* imageto Fontutils
	* iman xopt
	* imgrotate Fontutils
	* indent indent
	* indxbib Groff
	* inetd bsd44
	* info Texinfo
	* inimf TeX
	* init bsd44
	* initex TeX
	* inn bsd44
	* install Fileutils
	* iostat bsd44
	* isodiag mkisofs
	* isodump mkisofs
	* ispell Ispell
	* ixterm xopt
	* ixx xopt

	* join Textutils
	* jot bsd44
	* jove bsd44

	* kdestroy bsd44
	* kdump bsd44
	* kermit bsd44
	* kgames xopt
	* kgmon bsd44
	* kill bsd44
	* kinit bsd44
	* kinput2 xopt
	* klist bsd44
	* kpasswdd bsd44
	* ksrvtgt bsd44
	* kterm xopt
	* ktrace bsd44

	* lam bsd44
	* larn bsd44
	* lasergnu gnuplot
	* last bsd44
	* lastcomm bsd44
	* latex TeX
	* lclock xopt
	* ld Binutils
	* leave bsd44
	* less less
	* lesskey less
	* libavcall.a ffcall
	* libbfd.a Binutils
	* libbfd.a GDB
	* libbzr.a Fontutils
	* libc.a C Library
	* libcompat.a bsd44
	* libcurses.a bsd44
	* libcurses.a ncurses
	* libdcurses.a ncurses
	* libedit.a bsd44
	* libF77.a f2c
	* libF77.a g77
	* libg++.a libg++
	* libgdbm.a gdbm
	* libgf.a Fontutils
	* libgmp.a gmp
	* libgnanslib Gnans
	* libI77.a f2c
	* libI77.a g77
	* libkvm.a bsd44
	* libm.a bsd44
	* libncurses.a ncurses
	* libnihcl.a NIHCL
	* libnihclmi.a NIHCL
	* libnihclvec.a NIHCL
	* libnls.a xreq
	* libobjects.a libobjects
	* liboctave.a Octave
	* liboldX.a xreq
	* libpbm.a Fontutils
	* libPEXt.a xopt
	* libpk.a Fontutils
	* libresolv.a bsd44
	* librpc.a bsd44
	* libsipp.a SIPP
	* libtcl.a DejaGnu
	* libtelnet.a bsd44
	* libterm.a bsd44
	* libtermcap.a Termcap
	* libtfm.a Fontutils
	* libutil.a bsd44
	* libvacall.a ffcall
	* libWc.a xopt
	* libwidgets.a Fontutils
	* libX.a xreq
	* libXau.a xreq
	* libXaw.a xreq
	* libXcp.a xopt
	* libXcu.a xopt
	* libXdmcp.a xreq
	* libXmp.a xopt
	* libXmu.a xreq
	* libXO.a xopt
	* libXop.a xopt
	* libXp.a xopt
	* libXpex.a xopt
	* libXt.a xopt
	* libXt.a xreq
	* libXwchar.a xopt
	* liby.a bsd44
	* libYgl.a Ygl
	* limn Fontutils
	* listres xopt
	* listres xreq
	* lkbib Groff
	* ln Fileutils
	* locate Findutils
	* lock bsd44
	* logcvt-ip2n phttpd
	* logger bsd44
	* login bsd44
	* logname Shellutils
	* logo ucblogo
	* lookbib Groff
	* lorder bsd44
	* lpr bsd44
	* ls Fileutils

	* m4 m4
	* mail bsd44
	* mail-files Sharutils
	* mailshar Sharutils
	* make make
	* make-docfile Emacs
	* make-path Emacs
	* makeindex TeX
	* makeinfo Texinfo
	* MakeTeXPK TeX
	* man bsd44
	* man-macros Groff
	* mattrib mtools
	* maze xopt
	* maze xreq
	* mazewar xopt
	* mc mc
	* mcd mtools
	* mcopy mtools
	* mcserv mc
	* mdel mtools
	* mdir mtools
	* me-macros Groff
	* merge RCS
	* mesg bsd44
	* mf TeX
	* mformat mtools
	* mft TeX
	* mgdiff xopt
	* mh bsd44
	* mille bsd44
	* mkcache GN
	* mkdep bsd44
	* mkdir Fileutils
	* mkfifo Fileutils
	* mkisofs mkisofs
	* mklocale bsd44
	* mkmanifest mtools
	* mkmf bsd44
	* mkmodules CVS
	* mknod Fileutils
	* mkstr bsd44
	* mlabel mtools
	* mm-macros Groff
	* mmd mtools
	* monop bsd44
	* more bsd44
	* morse bsd44
	* mount bsd44
	* mountd bsd44
	* movemail Emacs
	* mprof bsd44
	* mrd mtools
	* mread mtools
	* mren mtools
	* ms-macros Groff
	* msgcmp gettext
	* msgfmt gettext
	* msgmerge gettext
	* msgs bsd44
	* msgunfmt gettext
	* mst Smalltalk
	* mt cpio
	* mterm xopt
	* mtree bsd44
	* mtype mtools
	* mule MULE
	* muncher xopt
	* mv Fileutils
	* mvdir Fileutils
	* mwrite mtools

	* nethack NetHack
	* netstat bsd44
	* newfs bsd44
	* nfsd bsd44
	* nfsiod bsd44
	* nfsstat bsd44
	* nice Shellutils
	* nl Textutils
	* nlmconv Binutils
	* nm Binutils
	* nohup Shellutils
	* notify HylaFAX
	* nroff Groff
	* number bsd44

	* objc GCC
	* objcopy Binutils
	* objdump Binutils
	* objective-c GCC
	* obst-boot OBST
	* obst-CC OBST
	* obst-cct OBST
	* obst-cgc OBST
	* obst-cmp OBST
	* obst-cnt OBST
	* obst-cpcnt OBST
	* obst-csz OBST
	* obst-dir OBST
	* obst-dmp OBST
	* obst-gen OBST
	* obst-gsh OBST
	* obst-init OBST
	* obst-scp OBST
	* obst-sil OBST
	* obst-stf OBST
	* oclock xreq
	* octave Octave
	* od Textutils
	* oleo Oleo
	* ora-examples xopt

	* p2c p2c
	* pagesize bsd44
	* palette xopt
	* pascal bsd44
	* passwd bsd44
	* paste Textutils
	* patch patch
	* patgen TeX
	* pathalias bsd44
	* pathchk Shellutils
	* pax bsd44
	* pbmplus xopt
	* perl perl
	* pfbtops Groff
	* phantasia bsd44
	* phttpd phttpd
	* pic Groff
	* pico pine
	* pig bsd44
	* pine pine
	* ping bsd44
	* pixedit xopt
	* pixmap xopt
	* pktogf TeX
	* pktype TeX
	* plaid xopt
	* plot2fig Graphics
	* plot2plot Graphics
	* plot2ps Graphics
	* plot2tek Graphics
	* pltotf TeX
	* pollrcvd HylaFAX
	* pom bsd44
	* pooltype TeX
	* portmap bsd44
	* ppt bsd44
	* pr Textutils
	* pr-addr GNATS
	* pr-edit GNATS
	* primes bsd44
	* printenv Shellutils
	* printf Shellutils
	* protoize GCC
	* proxygarb Spinner
	* ps bsd44
	* ps2ascii Ghostscript
	* ps2epsi Ghostscript
	* ps2fax HylaFAX
	* psbb Groff
	* pstat bsd44
	* psycho xopt
	* ptester phttpd
	* ptx ptx
	* pubdic+ xopt
	* puzzle xopt
	* puzzle xreq
	* pwd Shellutils
	* pyramid xopt

	* query-pr GNATS
	* quiz bsd44
	* quot bsd44
	* quota bsd44
	* quotacheck bsd44
	* quotaon bsd44

	* rain bsd44
	* random bsd44
	* ranlib Binutils
	* rbootd bsd44
	* rc rc
	* rcp bsd44
	* rcs RCS
	* rcs-to-cvs CVS
	* rcs2log Emacs
	* rcsdiff RCS
	* rcsfreeze RCS
	* rcsmerge RCS
	* rdist bsd44
	* reboot bsd44
	* recode recode
	* recvstats HylaFAX
	* red ed
	* refer Groff
	* remsync Sharutils
	* renice bsd44
	* repquota bsd44
	* restore bsd44
	* rev bsd44
	* rexecd bsd44
	* rlog RCS
	* rlogin bsd44
	* rlogind bsd44
	* rm Fileutils
	* rmail bsd44
	* rmdir Fileutils
	* rmt cpio
	* rmt tar
	* robots bsd44
	* rogue bsd44
	* route bsd44
	* routed bsd44
	* rr xopt
	* rs bsd44
	* rsh bsd44
	* rshd bsd44
	* runtest DejaGnu
	* runtest.exp DejaGnu
	* ruptime bsd44
	* rwho bsd44
	* rwhod bsd44

	* s2p perl
	* sail bsd44
	* saoimage SAOimage
	* savecore bsd44
	* sc bsd44
	* sccs bsd44
	* sccs2rcs CVS
	* scdisp xopt
	* screen screen
	* script bsd44
	* scsiformat bsd44
	* sctext xopt
	* sdiff Diffutils
	* sed sed
	* send-pr GNATS
	* sendfax HylaFAX
	* sendmail bsd44
	* sgi2fax HylaFAX
	* sgn GN
	* sh bsd44
	* shar Sharutils
	* shinbun xopt
	* shogi Shogi
	* showfont xopt
	* showmount bsd44
	* shutdown bsd44
	* size Binutils
	* sj3 xopt
	* sjxa xopt
	* slattach bsd44
	* sleep Shellutils
	* sliplogin bsd44
	* snake bsd44
	* snftobdf xopt
	* soelim Groff
	* sort Textutils
	* sos2obst OBST
	* spider xopt
	* split Textutils
	* startslip bsd44
	* stf OBST
	* strings Binutils
	* strip Binutils
	* stty Shellutils
	* su Shellutils
	* sum Textutils
	* superopt Superopt
	* swapon bsd44
	* sync bsd44
	* sysctl bsd44
	* syslogd bsd44
	* systat bsd44

	* tabs Termutils
	* tac Textutils
	* tail Textutils
	* taintperl perl
	* talk bsd44
	* talkd bsd44
	* tangle TeX
	* tar tar
	* tbl Groff
	* tcl DejaGnu
	* tclsh DejaGnu
	* tcopy bsd44
	* tcp Emacs
	* tee Shellutils
	* tek2plot Graphics
	* telnet bsd44
	* telnetd bsd44
	* test Shellutils
	* test-g++ DejaGnu
	* test-tool DejaGnu
	* tetris bsd44
	* tex TeX
	* tex3patch Texinfo
	* texi2dvi Texinfo
	* texindex Texinfo
	* texspell TeX
	* textfmt HylaFAX
	* tfmtodit Groff
	* tftopl TeX
	* tftp bsd44
	* tftpd bsd44
	* tgrind TeX
	* time time
	* timed bsd44
	* timer Emacs
	* timex xopt
	* tip bsd44
	* tkpostage xopt
	* tn3270 bsd44
	* touch Fileutils
	* tput Termutils
	* tr Textutils
	* traceroute bsd44
	* transcript HylaFAX
	* transfig xopt
	* trek bsd44
	* trn3 bsd44
	* troff Groff
	* trpt bsd44
	* trsp bsd44
	* true Shellutils
	* tset bsd44
	* tsort bsd44
	* tty Shellutils
	* ttygnans Gnans
	* tunefs bsd44
	* tupdate gettext
	* tvtwm xopt
	* twm xreq

	* ul bsd44
	* ulpc Spinner
	* umount bsd44
	* uname Shellutils
	* uncompress gzip
	* unexpand Textutils
	* unifdef bsd44
	* unify wdiff
	* uniq Textutils
	* unprotoize GCC
	* unshar Sharutils
	* unvis bsd44
	* update bsd44
	* updatedb Findutils
	* users Shellutils
	* uuchk UUCP
	* uucico UUCP
	* uuconv UUCP
	* uucp UUCP
	* uucpd bsd44
	* uudecode Sharutils
	* uudir UUCP
	* uuencode Sharutils
	* uulog UUCP
	* uuname UUCP
	* uupick UUCP
	* uurate UUCP
	* uusched UUCP
	* uustat UUCP
	* uuto UUCP
	* uux UUCP
	* uuxqt UUCP

	* v Fileutils
	* vacation bsd44
	* vandal xopt
	* vcdiff Emacs
	* vdir Fileutils
	* vftovp TeX
	* vgrind bsd44
	* vi nvi
	* viewres xopt
	* viewres xreq
	* vine xopt
	* vipw bsd44
	* virmf TeX
	* virtex TeX
	* vis bsd44
	* vmstat bsd44
	* vptovf TeX

	* w bsd44
	* waisgn GN
	* wakeup Emacs
	* wall bsd44
	* wargames bsd44
	* wc Textutils
	* wdiff wdiff
	* weave TeX
	* what bsd44
	* whatis bsd44
	* whereis bsd44
	* who Shellutils
	* whoami Shellutils
	* whois bsd44
	* window bsd44
	* winterp xopt
	* wish DejaGnu
	* worm bsd44
	* worms bsd44
	* write bsd44
	* wump bsd44

	* x11perf xreq
	* x2p perl
	* xalarm xopt
	* xancur xopt
	* xargs Findutils
	* xauth xreq
	* xbfe Fontutils
	* xbiff xopt
	* xbiff xreq
	* xboard xboard
	* xboing xopt
	* xbuffy3 xopt
	* xcalc xopt
	* xcalc xreq
	* xcalendar xopt
	* xcdplayer xopt
	* xcell xopt
	* xclipboard xreq
	* xclock xreq
	* xcmdmenu xopt
	* xcms xopt
	* xcmsdb xreq
	* xcmstest xreq
	* xco xopt
	* xcolorize xopt
	* xcolors xopt
	* xconsole xreq
	* xcrtca xopt
	* xdaliclock xopt
	* xdiary xopt
	* xditview Groff
	* xditview xopt
	* xditview xreq
	* xdm xreq
	* xdpyinfo xreq
	* xdu xopt
	* xdvi TeX
	* xdvi xopt
	* xdvorak xopt
	* xearth xopt
	* xed xopt
	* xedit xopt
	* xedit xreq
	* xev xopt
	* xev xreq
	* xexit xopt
	* xeyes xopt
	* xeyes xreq
	* xfd xreq
	* xfed xopt
	* xfedor xopt
	* xfeoak xopt
	* xferstats HylaFAX
	* xfig xopt
	* xfontsel xopt
	* xfontsel xreq
	* xforecast xopt
	* xgas xopt
	* xgas xreq
	* xgc xopt
	* xgc xreq
	* xgettext gettext
	* xhearts xopt
	* xhelp xopt
	* xhost xreq
	* xinit xreq
	* xkeycaps xopt
	* xkill xreq
	* xlax xopt
	* xlayout xopt
	* xlbiff xopt
	* xless xopt
	* xload xopt
	* xload xreq
	* xlogin xopt
	* xlogo xreq
	* xlsatoms xreq
	* xlsclients xreq
	* xlsfonts xreq
	* xmag xreq
	* xmail xopt
	* xmailbox xopt
	* xmailwatcher xopt
	* xman xopt
	* xman xreq
	* xmandel xopt
	* xmessage xopt
	* xmeter xopt
	* xmh xreq
	* xmh-icons xopt
	* xmh.editor xopt
	* xmodmap xreq
	* xmon xopt
	* xmove xopt
	* xmphone xopt
	* xpd xopt
	* xphoon xopt
	* xpipeman xopt
	* xplot Graphics
	* xpostit xopt
	* xpr xopt
	* xpr xreq
	* xprompt xopt
	* xproof xopt
	* xprop xreq
	* xpserv xopt
	* xrdb xreq
	* xrefresh xreq
	* xrsh xopt
	* xrubik xopt
	* xrunclient xopt
	* xscope xopt
	* xscreensaver xopt
	* xsession xopt
	* xset xreq
	* xsetroot xreq
	* xshogi xshogi
	* xstdcmap xreq
	* xstr bsd44
	* xtalk xopt
	* xterm xreq
	* xterm_color xopt
	* xtetris xopt
	* xTeXcad.13 xopt
	* xtiff xopt
	* xtree xopt
	* xtv xopt
	* xwd xreq
	* xwininfo xreq
	* xwud xreq

	* yacc bsd44
	* yes Shellutils
	* youbin xopt
	* yow Emacs

	* zcat gzip
	* zcmp gzip
	* zdiff gzip
	* zforce gzip
	* zgrep gzip
	* zmore gzip
	* znew gzip

	* [ Shellutils



Tapes
*****

We offer Unix source code on tapes in `tar' format on these media:

   * 4mm DAT cartridge tape.

   * 8mm Exabyte cartridge tape.

   * Sun DC300XLP QIC-24 1/4in cartridge (readable on some other systems).

   * Hewlett-Packard 16-track DC600HC 1/4in cartridge tape.

   * IBM RS/6000 QIC-150 1/4in cartridge (readable on some other systems).

   * 1600bpi 9-track 1/2in reel tape.

The contents of the various tapes for Unix systems are the same; only the
media are different.  For prices, see the *note Free Software Foundation
Order Form::..	Source code for the manuals & reference cards is included
(*note Documentation::.).

Some of the files on the tapes are compressed with `gzip' to allow more files
on each tape.  Refer to the top-level `README' file at the beginning of each
tape for instructions on uncompressing them.  `uncompress' and `unpack' *do
not work*!



Languages Tape
--------------

This tape contains programming tools: compilers, interpreters and, related
programs (parsers, translators, debuggers, linkers, etc.).

	* Binutils 2.6
	* Bison 1.24
	* C Library 1.09
	* cperf 2.1a
	* DejaGnu 1.2
	* dld 3.2.3
	* ecc 1.2.1
	* f2c 1995.02.24
	* flex 2.5.2
	* g77 0.5.17
	* GAWK 2.15.6
	* GCC/G++/Objective-C 2.7.2
	* GDB 4.15.1
	* gdbm 1.7.3
	* gettext 0.10
	* gmp 1.3.2
	* gzip 1.2.4
	* indent 1.9.1
	* libg++ 2.7.1
	* libobjects 0.1.3
	* make 3.74
	* ncurses 1.9.4
	* NIHCL 3.1.4
	* OBST 3.4.3
	* Octave 1.1.1
	* p2c 1.20
	* perl 4.036
	* perl 5.001
	* regex 0.12
	* rx 0.05
	* Smalltalk 1.1.1
	* Superopt 2.5
	* Texinfo 3.6
	* Tile Forth 2.1
	* ucblogo 3.3



Lisps/Emacs Tape
----------------

This tape has Common Lisp systems and libraries, GNU Emacs, assorted
extensions that work with Emacs, manuals, & a few other important utilities.

	* Calc 2.02c
	* CLISP 1995.12.04
	* CLX 5.02
	* Common Lisp 2.2
	* Elib 0.06
	* Emacs 18.59
	* Emacs 19.28
	* Emacs 19.30
	* GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual Ed. 1.03 for Version 18
	* GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual Ed. 2.4 for Version 19.29
	* gnuserv 2.1alpha
	* gzip 1.2.4
	* Hyperbole 4.01
	* make 3.74
	* MULE 2.3
	* PCL 2.2
	* Programming in Emacs Lisp: An Introduction Ed. 1.04
	* Texinfo 3.6
	* W3 2.2.25



Utilities Tape
--------------

This tape consists mostly of smaller utilities and miscellaneous applications.

	* acm 4.7
	* Autoconf 2.7
	* BASH 1.14.5
	* bc 1.03
	* cfengine 1.2.14
	* cfengine 1.2.22
	* Chess 4.0.pl75
	* cpio 2.3
	* CVS 1.6
	* Diffutils 2.7
	* doschk 1.1
	* ed 0.2
	* es 0.84
	* Fileutils 3.12
	* Findutils 4.1
	* Finger 1.37
	* Fontutils 0.6
	* Ghostscript 2.6.2
	* Ghostview 1.5
	* Ghostview for Windows 1.0
	* GIT 4.3.6
	* GNATS 3.2
	* GnuGo 1.2
	* gnuplot 3.5
	* Graphics 0.17
	* grep 2.0
	* Groff 1.10
	* gzip 1.2.4
	* hello 1.3
	* hp2xx 3.1.4
	* HylaFAX 3.0.0
	* Ispell 3.1.20
	* less 2.9.0
	* m4 1.4
	* make 3.74
	* MandelSpawn 0.07
	* mc 3.0
	* mkisofs 1.04
	* mm 1.07
	* mtools 2.0.7
	* NetHack 3.1.3
	* nvi 1.34
	* Oleo 1.6
	* patch 2.1
	* pine 3.91
	* ptx 0.4
	* rc 1.4
	* RCS 5.7
	* readline 2.0
	* recode 3.4
	* SAOimage 1.16
	* screen 3.7.1
	* sed 2.05
	* Sharutils 4.2
	* Shellutils 1.12
	* Shogi 1.2.3
	* tar 1.11.8
	* Termcap 1.3
	* Termutils 2.0
	* Texinfo 3.6
	* Textutils 1.13
	* time 1.6
	* UUCP 1.06.1
	* wdiff 0.5
	* xboard 3.4.pl0
	* xshogi 1.2.03
	* Ygl 3.0.3



Scheme Tape
-----------

Scheme is a simplified, lexically-scoped dialect of Lisp.  It was designed at
MIT and other universities to teach students the art of programming and to
research new parallel programming constructs and compilation techniques.

This tape now has MIT Scheme 7.3, which conforms to the "Revised^4 Report On
the Algorithmic Language Scheme" (MIT AI Lab Memo 848b), for which TeX source
is included.  It is written partly in C, but is presently hard to bootstrap.
Binaries that can be used to bootstrap it exist for: HP 9000 series 300, 400,
700, & 800 (running HP-UX 9.0), NeXT (NeXT OS 2 or 3.2), DEC Alpha (OSF/1),
IBM RS/6000 (AIX), Sun-3 or Sun-4 (SunOS 4.1), DECstation 3100/5100 (Ultrix
4.0), Sony NeWS-3250 (NEWS OS 5.01), & Intel i386 (MS-DOS, Windows 3.1 or NT).
If your system is not on this list & you don't enjoy the bootstrap challenge,
see "JACAL" in *Note GNU Software::.



X11 Tapes
---------

The two X11 tapes contain Version 11, Release 6 of the X Window System.	 The
first tape has all of the core software, documentation, & some contributed
clients.  We call this the "required" X tape since it is necessary for
running X or Emacs under X.  The second, "optional" tape has contributed
libraries & toolkits, the Andrew User Interface System, games, etc.

The X11 Required tape also contains all fixes and patches released to date.
We update this tape as new fixes and patches are released for programs on
both tapes.  *Note Tape & CD-ROM Subscription Service::.

While supplies last, we will distribute X11R5 on the *Note November 1993
Source Code CD-ROM::.



Berkeley 4.4BSD-Lite Tape
-------------------------

The "4.4BSD-Lite" release is the last from the Computer Systems Research
Group at the University of California at Berkeley.  It has most of the BSD
software system, except for a few files that remain proprietary.  It is much
more complete than the previous "Net2" release.



VMS Emacs and VMS Compiler Tapes
--------------------------------

We offer two VMS tapes.	 One has just GNU Emacs 18.59 (none of the other
software on the *Note Lisps/Emacs Tape::, is included).	 The other has GCC
2.3.3, Bison 1.19 (to compile GCC), `gas' 1.38 (to assemble GCC's output), and
some library and include files (none of the other software on the *Note
Languages Tape::, is included).	 We are not aware of a GDB port for VMS.
Both VMS tapes have DEC VAX executables from which you can bootstrap, as the
DEC VMS C compiler cannot compile GCC.	We do not have executables for DEC
Alpha VMS systems.  Please do not ask us to devote effort to VMS support,
because it is peripheral to the GNU Project.



CD-ROMs
*******

We offer these CD-ROMs:

   * Several editions of our *Note Source Code CD-ROMs::.

   * *Note December 1995 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::.

   * *Note December 1994 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::.

   * *Note December 1993 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::.

   * *Note MS-DOS Book with CD-ROM::.

   * *Note Debian GNU/Linux Book with CD-ROM::.

Our CD-ROMs are in ISO 9660 format & can be mounted as a read-only file
system on most computers.  If your driver supports it you can mount each CD
with "Rock Ridge" extensions (the MS-DOS CD-ROM is only in ISO 9660 format),
& it will look just like an ordinary Unix file system, rather than one full
of truncated & otherwise mangled names that fit vanilla ISO 9660.

You can build most of the software without copying the sources off the CD.
You only need enough disk space for object files and intermediate build
targets.



Pricing of the GNU CD-ROMs
--------------------------

If a business or organization is ultimately paying, the December 1995 Source
CDs costs $240.	 It costs $60 if you, an individual, are paying out of your
own pocket.  The December 1995 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM costs $220 for
a business or organization, and $55 for an individual.



What do the individual and company prices mean?
...............................................

The software on our disks is free; anyone can copy it and anyone can run it.
What we charge for is the physical disk and the service of distribution.

We charge two different prices depending on who is buying.  When a company or
other organization buys the December 1995 Source CD-ROMs, we charge $240.
When an individual buys the same CD-ROM, we charge just $60.  This
distinction is not a matter of who is allowed to use the software.  In either
case, once you have a copy, you can distribute as many copies as you wish and
there's no restriction on who can have or run them.  The price distinction is
entirely a matter of what kind of entity pays for the CD.

You, the reader, are certainly an individual, not a company.  If you are
buying a disk "in person", then you are probably doing so as an individual.
But if you expect to be reimbursed by your employer, then the disk is really
for the company; so please pay the company price and get reimbursed for it.
We won't try to check up on you--we use the honor system--so please cooperate.

Buying CDs at the company price is very helpful for GNU; just
140 Source CDs at that price support an FSF programmer or tech writer for a
year.



Why is there an individual price?
.................................

In the past, our distribution tapes have been ordered mainly by companies.
The CD at the price of $240 provides them with all of our software for a much
lower price than they would previously have paid for six different tapes.  To
lower the price more would cut into the FSF's funds very badly and decrease
the software development we can do.

However, for individuals, $240 is too high a price; hardly anyone could
afford that.  So we decided to make CDs available to individuals at the lower
price of $60.



Is there a maximum price?
.........................

Our stated prices are minimum prices.  Feel free to pay a higher price if you
wish to support GNU development more.  The sky's the limit; we will accept as
high a price as you can offer.	Or simply give a donation (tax-deductible in
the U.S.) to the Free Software Foundation, a tax-exempt public charity.



December 1995 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
--------------------------------------------

We now have the third edition of our CD-ROM that has binaries and complete
sources for GNU compiler tools for some systems which lack a compiler.	This
enables the people who use these systems to compile GNU and other free
software without having to buy a proprietary compiler.	You can also use
these GNU tools to compile your own C/C++/Objective-C programs.	 Older
editions of this CD are available while supplies last at a reduced price; see
the *note Free Software Foundation Order Form::..

We hope to have more systems on each update of this CD.	 If you can help
build binaries for new systems (especially those that don't come with a C
compiler), or have one to suggest, please contact us at the addresses on page
1.

These packages:

	* DJGPP 1.12m4 from GCC 2.6.3
	* GCC/G++/Objective-C 2.7.1
	* GNU C Library 1.09
	* GDB 4.15.1
	* Binutils 2.6
	* Bison 1.24
	* Emacs 19.29 (MS-DOS only)
	* Flex 2.5.2
	* Make 3.74
	* libg++ 2.7.1

On these platforms:

	* `i386-msdos'
	* `hppa1.0-hp-hpux9'
	* `sparc-sun-solaris2'
	* `sparc-sun-sunos4.1'



December 1994 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
--------------------------------------------

We still have the 2nd edition of our CD-ROM that contains executables for GNU
compiler tools for some systems which lack a compiler.	This enables the
people who use these systems to compile GNU and other free software without
having to buy a proprietary compiler.  You can also use the GNU compilation
system to compile your own C/C++/Objective-C programs.

We hope to have more systems on each update of this CD.	 If you can help
build binaries for new systems (especially those that don't come with a C
compiler), or have one to suggest, please contact us at the addresses on
page 1.

These packages:

	* DJGPP 1.12.m2 from GCC 2.6.0
	* GCC/G++/Objective-C 2.6.2
	* GNU C Library 1.09
	* GDB 4.13
	* Binutils 2.5.2
	* Bison 1.22
	* Emacs 19.26 (MS-DOS only)
	* Flex 2.4.7
	* Make 3.72.1
	* libg++ 2.6.1

On these platforms:

	* `i386-msdos'
	* `hppa1.1-hp-hpux9'
	* `sparc-sun-solaris2'
	* `sparc-sun-sunos4.1'



December 1993 Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
---------------------------------------------

We still have the 1st edition of our CD-ROM that contains executables for GNU
compiler tools for some systems which lack a compiler.	This will allow users
of those systems to compile GNU and other free software without having to buy
a proprietary compiler.

The CD-ROM is in ISO 9660 format and can be mounted as a read-only file
system on most operating systems.  If your driver supports it you can mount
the CD-ROM with "Rock Ridge" extensions and it will look just like an
ordinary Unix file system, rather than one full of truncated and otherwise
mangled names that fit the vanilla ISO 9660 specifications.

We hope to have more systems included with each update of this CD-ROM.	If
you can help build binaries for new systems (especially for systems that
don't come with a C compiler), or have a system to suggest, please contact us
at either address on the front cover.

These programs:

   * DJGPP 1.11.m1

   * GCC/G++/Objective C 2.5.7

   * GDB 4.11

   * GAS 2.2

   * Binutils 2.3

   * Bison 1.22

   * Flex 2.4.5

   * Make 3.70

   * libg++ 2.5.3

For these platforms:

   * `i386-msdos'

   * `hppa1.1-hp-hpux9'

   * `sparc-sun-solaris2'

   * `sparc-sun-sunos4.1'



Source Code CD-ROMs
-------------------

We have several versions of our Source Code CD-ROMs available, including:

   * *Note December 1995 Source Code CD-ROMs::, the newest release, has
     programs, bug fixes, & improvements not on the other CDs.

   * *Note June 1995 Source Code CD-ROM::.

   * *Note May 1994 Source Code CD-ROM::..

   * *Note November 1993 Source Code CD-ROM::.

   * May 1993 Source Code CD-ROM, see the *note Free Software Foundation
     Order Form::..

   * October 1992 Source Code CD-ROM, see the *note Free Software Foundation
     Order Form::..

The older Source CDs are available while supplies last at a reduced price
(please note that the December 1994 Source CD is permanently out of stock).
All the Source CDs have Texinfo source for the GNU manuals listed in *Note
Documentation::.

The VMS tapes' contents are *not* included.  Many programs that are only on
MS-DOS diskettes & not on the tapes are also *not* included.  The MIT Scheme
& X11 Optional tapes' contents are *not* on the older Source CDs.  *Note
Tapes:: & *Note MS-DOS Diskettes::.

There are no precompiled programs on these Source CDs.	You will need a C
compiler (programs which need some other interpreter or compiler normally
provide the C source for a bootstrapping program).  We ship C compiler
binaries for some systems on the *Note Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::.



December 1995 Source Code CD-ROMs
.................................

The 7th edition of our Source CD is out!  Due to increasing amounts of GNU
Software, the Source Code CD is now a two disc set--the price remains
unchanged!  It contains these packages, & some manuals that are not part of
packages:

	* acm 4.7
	* apache 0.8.8
	* Autoconf 2.7
	* BASH 1.14.5
	* bc 1.03
	* Binutils 2.5.2
	* Binutils 2.6
	* Bison 1.24
	* C Library 1.09
	* Calc 2.02c
	* cfengine 1.2.21
	* Chess 4.0.pl75
	* CLISP 1995.08.12
	* Common Lisp 2.2
	* cperf 2.1a
	* cpio 2.3
	* CVS 1.6
	* DDD 1.3b
	* DejaGnu 1.2.9
	* Diffutils 2.7
	* dld 3.2.3
	* doschk 1.1
	* ecc 1.2.1
	* ed 0.2
	* Elib 0.07
	* Elisp archive
	* Emacs 18.59
	* Emacs 19.28
	* Emacs 19.29
	* Emacs 19.30
	* es 0.84
	* f2c 1995.11.18
	* ffcall 1.0
	* Fileutils 3.12
	* Findutils 4.1
	* Finger 1.37
	* flex 2.5.2
	* Fontutils 0.6
	* g77 0.5.17
	* GAWK 2.15.6
	* GCC/G++/Objective C 2.7.1
	* GDB 4.15.1
	* gdbm 1.7.3
	* gettext 0.9a
	* Ghostscript 2.6.2
	* Ghostview 1.5
	* Ghostview for Windows 1.0
	* GIT 4.3.7
	* gmp 1.3.2
	* GN 2.23
	* Gnans 1.5
	* GNATS 3.2
	* GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual, Ed. 1.03 for Version 18.59
	* GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual, Ed. 2.4 for Version 19.29
	* GnuGo 1.2
	* gnuplot 3.5
	* gnuserv 2.1alpha
	* Graphics 0.17
	* grep 2.0
	* Groff 1.09
	* gzip 1.2.4
	* hello 1.3
	* hp2xx 3.1.4
	* HylaFAX v3.0pl0
	* Hyperbole 4.01
	* indent 1.9.1
	* Ispell 3.1.20
	* less 290
	* libg++ 2.7.1
	* libobjects 0.1.3
	* m4 1.4
	* make 3.74
	* mc 3.0
	* MIT Scheme 7.3
	* mkisofs 1.04GNU
	* mtools 2.0.7
	* MULE 2.3
	* ncurses 1.9.7a
	* NetHack 3.1.3
	* NIHCL 3.1.4
	* nvi 1.34
	* Oaklisp 93.07.23
	* OBST 3.4.3
	* Octave 1.1.1
	* Oleo 1.6
	* p2c 1.20
	* patch 2.1
	* perl 4.036
	* perl 5.001
	* phttpd 0.99.68
	* pine 3.91
	* Programming in Emacs Lisp: An Introduction, Ed. 1.04
	* ptx 0.4
	* rc 1.4
	* RCS 5.7
	* recode 3.4
	* regex 0.12
	* rx 0.05
	* SAOimage 1.08
	* screen 3.7.1
	* sed 2.05
	* Sharutils 4.1
	* Shellutils 1.12
	* Shogi 1.2p03
	* SIPP 3.1
	* Smalltalk 1.1.1
	* SNePS 2.3.1
	* Spinner 1.0b11
	* Superopt 2.5
	* tar 1.11.8
	* Termcap 1.3
	* TeX 3.145
	* Texinfo 3.6
	* Textutils 1.13
	* Tile Forth 2.1
	* time 1.6
	* tput 1.0
	* ucblogo 3.3
	* UUCP 1.06.1
	* W3 2.2.25
	* wdiff 0.5
	* X11R6
	* xboard 3.3.pl3
	* xgrabsc 2.41
	* xshogi 1.2p03
	* Ygl 3.0.2



June 1995 Source Code CD-ROM
............................

We still have the 6th edition of our Source CD at a reduced price while
supplies last.	Not all FSF distributed software is included (*note Source
Code CD-ROMs::.).  It contains these packages, and some manuals that are not
part of packages:

	* acm 4.7
	* Autoconf 2.4
	* BASH 1.14.5
	* bc 1.03
	* Binutils 2.5.2
	* Bison 1.24
	* C Library 1.09
	* Calc 2.02c
	* cfengine 1.0.4
	* Chess 4.0.pl74
	* CLISP 1995.04.25
	* Common Lisp 2.1
	* cperf 2.1a
	* cpio 2.3
	* CVS 1.3
	* DejaGnu 1.2
	* Diffutils 2.7
	* dld 3.2.3
	* doschk 1.1
	* ecc 1.2.1
	* ed 0.2
	* elib 0.06
	* Emacs 18.59
	* Emacs 19.28
	* Emacs 19.29
	* GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual Ed. 1.03 for Version 18
	* GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual Ed. 2.4 for Version 19.29
	* es 0.84
	* f2c 1995.02.24
	* Fileutils 3.12
	* Findutils 4.1
	* Finger 1.37
	* flex 2.5.2
	* Fontutils 0.6
	* g77 0.5.15
	* GAWK 2.15.6
	* GCC/G++/Objective C 2.6.3
	* GCC/G++/Objective C 2.7.0
	* GDB 4.14
	* gdbm 1.7.3
	* Ghostscript 2.6.2
	* Ghostview 1.5
	* Ghostview for Windows 1.0
	* GIT 4.3.6
	* gmp 1.3.2
	* GNATS 3.2
	* GnuGo 1.1
	* gnuplot 3.5
	* Graphics 0.17
	* grep 2.0
	* Groff 1.09
	* gzip 1.2.4
	* hello 1.3
	* hp2xx 3.1.4
	* HylaFAX 3.0.pl0
	* indent 1.9.1
	* Ispell 3.1.18
	* less 2.90
	* libg++ 2.6.2
	* libg++ 2.7.0
	* libobjects 0.1.3
	* m4 1.4
	* make 3.74
	* MandelSpawn 0.07
	* mkisofs 1.03GNU
	* mtools 2.0.7
	* MULE 2.2
	* ncurses 1.9.1
	* NetHack 3.1.3
	* NIHCL 3.1.4
	* nvi 1.34
	* OBST 3.4.3
	* Octave 1.1.1
	* Oleo 1.6
	* p2c 1.20
	* patch 2.1
	* PCL 2.1
	* perl 4.036
	* perl 5.001
	* pine 3.91
	* Programming in Emacs Lisp: An Introduction Ed. 1.03 for Version 19
	* ptx 0.4
	* rc 1.4
	* RCS 5.7
	* recode 3.4
	* regex 0.12
	* rx 0.05
	* screen 3.6.2
	* sed 2.05
	* Sharutils 4.1
	* Shellutils 1.12
	* Shogi 1.2p03
	* Smalltalk 1.1.1
	* Superopt 2.5
	* tar 1.11.8
	* Termcap 1.2
	* TeX 3.1415
	* Texinfo 3.6
	* Textutils 1.12
	* Tile Forth 2.1
	* time 1.6
	* tput 1.0
	* ucblogo
	* UUCP 1.05
	* wdiff 0.5
	* X11R6
	* xboard 3.2.pl2
	* xshogi 1.2p03
	* Ygl 2.9.5



May 1994 Source Code CD-ROM
...........................

We still have the 4th edition of our Source CD, at a reduced price.	This
CD has Edition 2.3 for version 19 of the `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual' &
some additional software; not all FSF distributed software is included (see
``Source Code CD-ROMs'').  It contains the following packages:
	* acm 4.5
	* Autoconf 1.10
	* BASH 1.13.5
	* bc 1.02
	* Binutils 2.3
	* Bison 1.22
	* C Library 1.08
	* Calc 2.02c
	* Chess 4.0.69
	* CLISP 1994.01.08
	* Common Lisp 1.0
	* cpio 2.3
	* CVS 1.3
	* dc 0.2
	* DejaGnu 1.2
	* Diffutils 2.6
	* dld 3.2.3
	* doschk 1.1
	* ecc 1.2.1
	* ed 0.1
	* elib 0.06
	* Emacs 18.59
	* Emacs 19.23
	* es 0.84
	* f2c 1994.04.14
	* Fileutils 3.9
	* find 3.8
	* finger 1.37
	* flex 2.4.6
	* Fontutils 0.6
	* GAS 1.36.utah
	* GAS 2.2
	* Gawk 2.15.4
	* GCC 2.5.8
	* GDB 4.12
	* gdbm 1.7.1
	* Ghostscript 2.6.1
	* Ghostview 1.5
	* Ghostview for Windows 1.0
	* gmp 1.3.2
	* GNATS 3.2
	* GnuGo 1.1
	* gnuplot 3.5
	* gperf 2.1a
	* Graphics 0.17
	* grep 2.0
	* Groff 1.09
	* gzip 1.2.4
	* hello 1.3
	* hp2xx 3.1.4
	* indent 1.9.1
	* ispell 4.0
	* libg++ 2.5.3
	* m4 1.1
	* Make 3.71
	* MandelSpawn 0.07
	* mtools 2.0.7
	* MULE 1.0
	* NetFax 3.2.1
	* Nethack 3.1.3
	* NIHCL 3.0
	* nvi 1.11
	* Octave 1.0
	* Oleo 1.5
	* p2c 1.20
	* patch 2.1
	* PCL 1993.03.18
	* perl 4.036
	* ptx 0.3
	* rc 1.4
	* RCS 5.6.0.1
	* recode 3.3
	* regex 0.12
	* screen 3.5.2
	* sed 2.05
	* shellutils 1.9.4
	* Shogi 1.1.02
	* Smalltalk 1.1.1
	* Superopt 2.3
	* tar 1.11.2
	* Termcap 1.2
	* TeX 3.1
	* Texinfo 3.1
	* Textutils 1.9.1
	* Tile Forth 2.1
	* time 1.6
	* tput 1.0
	* UUCP 1.05
	* uuencode 1.0
	* wdiff 0.04
	* X11R6
	* xboard 3.0.9
	* xshogi 1.2.02



November 1993 Source Code CD-ROM
................................

We still have the 3rd edition of our Source CD, at a reduced price, while
supplies last.	It was the last Source Code CD to contain X11R5.  This CD has
Edition 2.2 for version 19 of the `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual' & some
additional software; not all FSF distributed software is included (*note
Source Code CD-ROMs::.).  It contains these packages:

	* acm 3.1
	* Autoconf 1.7
	* BASH 1.13.4
	* bc 1.02
	* Binutils 1.9 2.3
	* Bison 1.22
	* C Library 1.06.7
	* Calc 2.02b
	* Chess 4.0p62
	* CLISP 93.11.08
	* cpio 2.3
	* CVS 1.3
	* dc 0.2
	* DejaGnu 1.0.1
	* Diffutils 2.6
	* dld 3.2.3
	* doschk 1.1
	* ecc 1.2.1
	* elib 0.06
	* Emacs 18.59
	* Emacs 19.21
	* es 0.84
	* f2c 1993.04.28
	* Fileutils 3.9
	* find 3.8
	* Finger 1.37
	* flex 2.3.8
	* Fontutils 0.6
	* GAS 1.36.utah
	* GAS 1.38.1
	* GAS 2.2
	* GAWK 2.15.3
	* GCC/G++/Objective C 2.5.4
	* GDB 4.11
	* gdbm 1.7.1
	* Ghostscript 2.6.1
	* Ghostview 1.5
	* Ghostview for Windows 1.0
	* gmp 1.3.2
	* GNATS 3.01
	* GnuGo 1.1
	* gnuplot 3.5
	* cperf 2.1a
	* Graphics 0.17
	* grep 2.0
	* Groff 1.08
	* gzip 1.2.4
	* hello 1.3
	* hp2xx 3.1.3a
	* indent 1.8
	* Ispell 4.0
	* less 177
	* libg++ 2.5.1
	* m4 1.1
	* make 3.69.1
	* MandelSpawn 0.06
	* mtools 2.0.7
	* MULE 1.0
	* NetFax 3.2.1
	* NetHack 3.1.3
	* NIHCL 3.0
	* Oleo 1.5
	* p2c 1.20
	* patch 2.1
	* PCL 93.03.18
	* perl 4.036
	* ptx 0.3
	* rc 1.4
	* RCS 5.6.0.1
	* recode 3.2.4
	* regex 0.12
	* screen 3.5.2
	* sed 1.18 2.03
	* Shellutils 1.9.1
	* Shogi 1.1p02
	* Smalltalk 1.1.1
	* Superopt 2.3
	* tar 1.11.2
	* Termcap 1.2
	* TeX 3.1
	* Texinfo 3.1
	* Tile Forth 2.1
	* time 1.6
	* time 1.6
	* tput 1.0
	* UUCP 1.04
	* uuencode 1.0
	* wdiff 0.04
	* X11R5



MS-DOS Book with CD-ROM
-----------------------

We are working on our first book describing GNU Software for MS-DOS, but we
do not know when it will be finished.  It will include a CD-ROM with all the
sources & binaries on the MS-DOS Diskettes and more.

Please do NOT contact us about this book until we announce it on our mailing
lists (to subscribe, ask `info-gnu-request@prep.ai.mit.edu'), because it just
slows us down.



Debian GNU/Linux Book with CD-ROM
---------------------------------

We are working on our first book describing Debian GNU/Linux but we do not
know when it will be finished.	Please do NOT contact us about this book
until we announce it on our mailing lists (ask
`info-gnu-request@prep.ai.mit.edu' to subscribe), because it just slows us
down.

A CD will be inside the book with sources & binaries for Debian GNU/Linux,
which is a complete operating system for i386/i486/Pentium.  It is a
GNU/Linux system--that is to say, a variant GNU system which uses Linux as
the kernel.  (All the systems now available that use the Linux kernel are
GNU/Linux systems, see item "Linux" in *Note Free Software for
Microcomputers::.)

Debian is being developed by Ian Murdock and the Debian Association in
conjunction with the Free Software Foundation.	We are distributing it as an
interim measure until the GNU kernel (the Hurd) is ready for users.

For details on Debian & how to help, see URL: `http://www.debian.org/' or
FTP, `/pub/gnu/GNUinfo/DEBIAN' from a GNU FTP host (*note How to Get GNU
Software::.).  FTP Debian under `/debian' from `ftp.debian.org'.



MS-DOS Diskettes
****************

The FSF distributes some of the GNU software ported to MS-DOS, on 3.5inch
1.44MB diskettes.  These disks have both sources and executables.



DJGPP Diskettes
---------------

We offer DJGPP on 30 diskettes.	 For further details, see *Note GNU
Software::.  The DJGPP diskettes contain the following:

	* Binutils 2.5.2
	* Bison 1.22
	* Diffutils 2.6
	* DJGPP 1.12m4
	* flex 2.4.7
	* GCC/G++ 2.6.3
	* GDB 4.12
	* Groff 1.09
	* gzip 1.24
	* libg++ 2.6.2
	* make 3.71
	* patch 2.1
	* sed 1.18
	* Texinfo 3.1



Emacs Diskettes
---------------

Two versions of GNU Emacs are included on the Emacs diskettes we distribute:
GNU Emacs version 19.29 handles 8-bit character sets; the other, MULE version
2.2, handles 16-bit character sets including Kanji.



Selected Utilities Diskettes
----------------------------

The GNUish MS-DOS Project ported GNU software to PC compatibles.  Though
GNUish is no longer active, users still ask for these ports done some years
ago.  We offer these ports on five diskettes.  In general, the ports run on
8086/80286-based 16-bit machines; an 80386 is not required.  Some are
necessarily missing features.

Included are: `cpio', `diff', `find', `flex', `gdbm', `grep', `indent',
`less', `m4', `make', `ptx', RCS, `sed', `shar', `sort', & Texinfo.



Windows Diskette
----------------

We offer GNU Chess and `gnuplot' for Microsoft Windows on a single diskette.



Tape & CD-ROM Subscription Service
**********************************

If you do not have net access, our subscription service enables you to stay
current with the latest GNU developments.  For a one-time cost equivalent to
three tapes or CD-ROMs (plus shipping in some cases), we will ship you four
new versions of the tape of your choice or the Source Code CD-ROM.  The tapes
are sent each quarter; the CD-ROMs are sent as they are issued (currently
twice a year, but we hope to make it more frequent).

Regularly, we will send you a new version of a Lisps/Emacs, Languages,
Utilities, or X Window System (X11R6) Required tape, or the Source CD-ROM.
The MIT Scheme and X Window System Optional tapes are not changed often
enough to warrant quarterly updates.  We do not yet know if we will be
offering subscriptions to the Compiler Tools Binaries or our new Books with
CD-ROM.

Since Emacs 19 is on the Lisps/Emacs Tape and the Source CD-ROM, a
subscription to either is an easy way to keep current with Emacs 19 as it
evolves.

A subscription is an easy way to keep up with the regular bug fixes to the X
Window System.	We update the X11R6 Required tape as fixes and patches are
issued throughout the year.  Each edition of the *Note Source Code CD-ROMs::,
also has updated sources for the required part of the X Window System.

Please note: In two cases, you must pay 4 times the normal shipping required
for a single order when you pay for each subscription.	If you're in Alaska,
Hawaii, or Puerto Rico you must add $20.00 for shipping for each
subscription.  If you're outside of U.S., Canada, and Puerto Rico, you must
add $80.00 for each subscription.  See "Unix and VMS Software" and "Shipping
Instructions" on the *note Free Software Foundation Order Form::..



FSF T-shirt
***********

There is a GNU & improved T-shirt.  The front has the GNU Emacs Lisp code
`(USE 'GNU)' with "`()'" being the dancing parentheses from the cover of our
`GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual' (drawn by Berkeley, CA artist Etienne
Suvasa).  The back of the shirt is still imprinted with the Preamble to the
GNU General Public License.

These shirts come in two colors, Natural & Black.  Natural is an off-white,
unbleached, undyed, environment-friendly cotton, printed with black ink, & is
great for tye-dyeing or displaying as is.  Black is printed with white ink &
is perfect for late night hacking.  All shirts are thick 100% cotton, & come
in sizes M, L, XL, & XXL.  GNU shirts often create spontaneous friendships at
technical conferences and on major university campuses!	 (They also make
great gifts!)



Free Software Foundation Order Form
***********************************

All items are distributed with permission to copy and to redistribute.
Texinfo source for each manual and source for each reference card is on
the appropriate tape, diskette, or CD-ROM; the prices for these magnetic
media do not include printed documentation.  All items are provided on
an ``as is'' basis, with no warranty of any kind.  Please allow six
weeks for delivery (though it won't usually take that long).


     PRICE AND CONTENTS MAY CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE AFTER June 30, 1996.



Unix and VMS Software
---------------------

These tapes in the formats indicated (*note Tapes::., for contents):

	Please circle the dollar amount for each tape you order.

		Reel to	  Sun (1)   HP	      IBM (2)	Exabyte	 DAT
		reel			      RS/6000
		Unix tar  Unix tar  Unix tar  Unix tar	Unix tar Unix tar
		9-track	  QIC-24    16-track  QIC-150
		1600 bpi  DC300XLP  DC600HC   DC600A
		1/2" reel 1/4" c.t. 1/4" c.t. 1/4" c.t. 8mm c.t. 4mm c.t.

    (c.t. = cartridge tape)

Lisps/Emacs	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225

Languages	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225

Utilities	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225

4.4BSD-Lite	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225

Scheme		$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225

X11R6-Required	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225

X11R6-Optional	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225

	 (1) Sun tapes can be read on some other Unix systems.
	 (2) IBM RS/6000 tapes can be read on some other Unix systems.


Subscriptions, 4 updates for one year (*note Tape & CD-ROM Subscription Service::.):

Emacs		$600	  $630	    $690      $645	$615	 $675

Languages	$600	  $630	    $690      $645	$615	 $675

Utilities	$600	  $630	    $690      $645	$615	 $675

X11R6-Required	$600	  $630	    $690      $645	$615	 $675

      Subtotal $ ______	 Please put total of the above circled amounts here.


These 1600 bpi reel-to-reel 9 track 1/2" tapes, in VMS BACKUP format (aka
interchange format) (*note VMS Emacs and VMS Compiler Tapes::.):

____ @ $195  = $ ______	  VMS Emacs, GNU Emacs source & executables only.

____ @ $195  = $ ______	  VMS Compiler, GCC, GAS, and Bison source and
			   executables only.


FSF Deluxe Distribution
.......................
(Please call with any questions.  *note Deluxe Distribution::. for machine,
operating system, and media types.):


____ @ $5000 = $ ______	  The Deluxe Distribution, with manuals, etc.

Machine: _____________________________________________________________________

Operating system: ____________________________________________________________

Media type: __________________________________________________________________

Version of X Windows System to build: _______________________________________



CD-ROMs, in ISO 9660 format (*note CD-ROMs::.):
..............................................


GNU Source Code CD-ROMs, Version 7 with X11R6 (*note December 1995 Source Code CD-ROMs::.):

____ @ $240  = $ ______	  for corporations and other organizations.

____ @ $ 60  = $ ______	  for individuals.


Subscriptions, next 4 updates, of the Source Code CD-ROM, in ISO 9660 format
(*note Tape & CD-ROM Subscription Service::.):

____ @ $720  = $ ______	  for corporations and other organizations.

____ @ $180  = $ ______	  for individuals.


GNU Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM, Version 3, December 1995 Edition
(*note Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::.):

____ @ $220  = $ ______	  for corporations and other organizations.

____ @	$55  = $ ______	  for individuals.



MS-DOS Software
---------------

The following sources and executables for MS-DOS, on 3.5" 1.44MB diskettes
(*note MS-DOS Diskettes::.):

____ @ $ 90  = $ ______	  Emacs diskettes, GNU Emacs, for 80386 and up.

____ @ $ 80  = $ ______	  DJGPP diskettes, GCC version 2, and other tools
			   for 80386 and up (also on the
			   *note Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM::.).

____ @ $ 85  = $ ______	  Selected Utilities diskettes, 8086 and up.

____ @ $ 40  = $ ______	  Windows diskette: GNU Chess and gnuplot for
			   Microsoft Windows.


Manuals
-------

These manuals (*note Documentation::.).	 The latest version of each manual
will be shipped.  Please call if you want a specific version.

____ @ $ 25  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version manual, with a reference card.

____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Lisp Reference manual, in two volumes.

____ @ $ 60  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Lisp Reference, Japanese Edition.

____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  Using and Porting GNU CC.

____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  GNU C Library Reference Manual.

____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Calc manual, with a reference card.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Programming in Emacs Lisp: An Introduction.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Debugging with GDB, with a reference card.

____ @ $ 25  = $ ______	  GAWK manual.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Make manual.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Bison manual, with a reference card.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Flex manual, with a reference card.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Texinfo manual.

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Termcap manual.



Reference Cards
---------------

The following reference cards, in packets of ten.  For single copies please
call.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 19 reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Calc reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  GDB reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  Bison reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  Flex reference cards.



T-shirts
--------

GNU/FSF T-shirts, thick 100% cotton (*note FSF T-shirt::.):

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Size M     ____ natural  ____ black.

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Size L     ____ natural  ____ black.

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Size XL    ____ natural  ____ black.

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Size XXL   ____ natural  ____ black.



Older Items
-----------

Older items are only available while supplies last.

____ @ $  5  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 18 reference cards, in packets
			   of ten.


Please fill in the number of each older CD-ROM you order:

						for		for
						corporations	individuals:
						and other
						organizations:

GNU Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
	December 1994 Edition (Version 2)	____________	____________

GNU Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
	December 1993 Edition (Version 1)	____________	____________


Please note that the December 1994 Source CD is permanently out of stock.

GNU Source Code CD-ROM
	June 1995 edition with X11R6		____________	____________

GNU Source Code CD-ROM
	May 1994 edition with X11R6		____________	____________

GNU Source Code CD-ROM
	November 1993 edition with X11R5	____________	____________

GNU Source Code CD-ROM
	May 1993 edition with X11R5		____________	____________

GNU Source Code CD-ROM
	October 1992 edition with X11R5		____________	____________


Please put the total count and cost of the above older CD-ROMs here:

____ @ $ 80  = $ ______	  for corporations and other organizations.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  for individuals.

		 ======

      Subtotal $ ______




Tax and Shipping Costs
----------------------

	     + $ ______	  For addresses in Massachusetts: add 5% sales tax
			  or give tax exempt number.  There is no sales tax
			  on T-shirts.
	     + $ ______	  Shipping fee for addresses in Alaska, Hawaii, or
			  Puerto Rico:
			    $  5.00 base charge;
			  + $  5.00 for *each* Emacs Calc or Emacs Lisp
			    Reference manual ($ 5.00 * #ofMans);
			  + $ 20.00 for *each* tape subscription or CD
			    subscription ($20.00 * #ofSubs);
			  + $  1.00 for *each* item other then the above
			    (shipping for all other items =
						     $ 1.00 * #ofOtherItems).
	     + $ ______	  Shipping fee for most Foreign Destinations: (Please
			  do *not* use this formula for addresses in China,
			  Guam, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, New Zealand,
			  Philippines, and Thailand.  Please fax,
			  or call for an exact shipping quote.)
			    $ 20.00 base charge for orders to other
			      addresses outside of U.S., Canada, & Puerto Rico:
			  + $ 80.00 for *each* tape subscription or CD
			    subscription ($ 80.00 * #ofSubs);
			  + $ 10.00 for *each* of the other items in the
			    order ($ 10.00 * #ofItems).
	     + $ ______	  Optional (tax-deductible in the U.S.) donation.
		 ------	  We suggest 5% if paying by credit card.

	 TOTAL $ ______	  We pay for shipping via UPS ground transportation in
			  the contiguous 48 states and Canada.	For very
			  large orders, ask about actual shipping costs for
			  that order.



Shipping Information
--------------------

Name: ________________________________________________________________________

Mail Stop/Dept. Name: ________________________________________________________

Organization: ________________________________________________________________

Street Address: ______________________________________________________________

City/State/Province: _________________________________________________________

Zip Code/Postal Code/Country: ________________________________________________

Telephone number in case of a problem with your order.
For international orders, please include a Fax number. _______________________


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|									     |
|  Orders filled only upon receipt of check, money order, or credit card     |
|  order in U.S. dollars.  Unpaid orders will be returned to the sender.     |
|  We do not have the staff to handle the billing of unpaid orders.  Please  |
|  help keep our lives simple by including your payment with your order.     |
|									     |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------



For orders from outside the U.S.:
---------------------------------

You are responsible for paying all duties, tariffs, and taxes.	If you
refuse to pay the charges, the shipper will return or abandon the order.


 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
 |									   |
 |	Please make checks payable to the ``Free Software Foundation''.	   |
 |									   |
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------



For Credit Card Orders:
-----------------------

The Free Software Foundation takes these credit cards: Carte Blanche,
Diner's Club, JCB, MasterCard, Visa, or American Express.  Please note that
we are charged about 5% of an order's total amount in credit card
processing fees.  Please consider paying by check instead, or adding on a 5%
donation to make up the difference.  To place a credit card order, please
give us this information:


Card type: ___________________________________________________________________

Account Number: ______________________________________________________________

Expiration Date: _____________________________________________________________

Cardholder's Signature: ______________________________________________________



------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|									     |
|     If you wish to pay by wire transfer or you are a reseller, please	     |
|     call or write us for details.					     |
|									     |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------


		Please mail orders to:	Free Software Foundation
					59 Temple Place -- Suite 330
					Boston, MA   02111
PRICES AND CONTENTS MAY CHANGE		+1-617-542-5942
WITHOUT NOTICE AFTER June 30, 1996.	Fax (including Japan): +1-617-542-2652

Version: January 1996 ASCII etc/ORDERS

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

local variables:
mode: text
fill-column: 78
end:
